---
Tags: [Artifacts, Articles, Deliverables]
---
Related: [[Writing]]

# Education as if people and planet matter
- As long as we live, breathe and experience; we learn. We're incredible creatures that way - coupled with our environment improvising the best we can - things happen and we adapt. An endless dance with our changing exterior worlds; parts of a whole, inseparable from our biosphere and doing our best to thrive. Despite our clumsiness, we are creatures that continuously learn.
- Why then does education matter? Stemming from the verb __educe__, which means __to bring out or develop__, one definition of education is the giving of __social, moral or intellectual instruction to someone__. Sounds important right? Naturally whatever's "brought out" can be gifts or curses depending on context and situation. Semantics aside though, let's simply accept that education is something formative and clearly of importance.
- A number of considerations arise at this point: What should such education be in service of? Why? And for whom? Trying to answer these questions for myself; the only ethical response that answers all three questions seems to be that education should be in service of people and planet. 
- Can education be used to raise the agency of those its forming, while helping them to navigate and steward the worlds increasing complexity (without externalising ones cost onto others and the environment)? If not, education is simply indoctrination into the values and beliefs of others - no matter how benevolent. It's a monoculture.
- "Facilitating emergence means creating conditions rather than giving directions, and it also means using the power of authority to empower others." - Fritjof Capra
- Assuming we don't want a monoculture, then we have to accept that people are complex and learn in different ways. One size does not fit all. What then, is an appropriate lens to look at education through? The conception will need to be systemic. 
- The most comprehensive approach I'm personally aware of is work by Dr. Clare Graves - a now deceased psychology professor from New York - who created the evidence based framework known as __Emergent Cyclical Theory__; a systems approach to psychology and learning. 
- __Emergent Cyclical Theory__ covers a LOT of ground - the majority of which will be left out of this essay. We'll briefly cover the conceptions and modalities however as they have implications for designing a wholistic curriculum. One that serves people and planet in an ethical way. 
- The theory posits that from the moment we are born we emerge into a generative dialectic between the environment and ourselves. Existential conditions and the response-abilities we've learnt. 
- In __Emergent Cyclical Theory__, how we learn is considered to be a attribute of our current psychological conception; at the subsistence levels of existence there are six primary conceptions which encompasses the six learning modalities. These are notated by ascending letter pairings which split the alphabet from [AN] to [FS]. Here's a brief description of each:
	- The [AN] conception of 'express self according to the dictates of one's imperative periodic physiological needs' is barely found in industrialised cultures any more. This cohort is generally occupied by infants, Alzheimer's patients and drug addicts. The learning style is habitual. 
	- The [BO] conception of 'sacrifice self to the traditions of one's elders, one's ancestors' is also quite rare except in small children. The learning style is Pavlovian. 
	- The [CP] conception of 'express self and to hell with the consequences, lest one suffer the torment of unbearable shame' is more prevalent in the modern world. An egocentric existence who's learning style is Operant.
	- The [DQ] conception of 'deny self now in order to receive reward later' is largely about doing things by the book or protocol without deviation. The learning style is avoidancy conditioning.
	- The [ER] conception of 'express self for what self desires, but in a fashion calculated not to bring down the wrath of others' is extremely prevalent in today's "individualistic culture" and is focused on scientific materialism where the only right way to do things is dispassionately and at a distance. Learning is through expectancy.
	- The [FS] conception of 'deny self now in order to get acceptance now, in order for all to get now' is becoming more prevalent in today's society. It's a generally socio-centric perspective and learns through observation. 
- All of these conceptions have additional detail worth discovering yourself of course, but for the sake of brevity I'm only providing outlines for our particular case of interest. If your interested in diving deeper, here be treasure! 
- At this point it's worth asserting that the current educational system is - generically - a projection (and consequentially a limitation) of what particular psychological conceptions think it should be. - a paradigm. More specifically the modality is lying somewhere in the gap between a righteously moralistic and technologically objectivistic world view - the [DQ] and [ER] conceptions. 
- A more holistic re-imagination of this system is of course possible and aligns pretty well with our introductory claim that education should be in service of people and planet. Learning should be geared to an individuals stage of development, the teacher bringing out more complex forms of the student by meeting and engaging with them at their level. 
- This would have massive knock on effects as the rising tide raises all boats. As conceptions mature, so does our humanity. According to Graves - if we can get the majority of humanity past the [ER] conception it's likely that the human behaviours of war and homicide would disappear. 
- It also seems that as ones conceptions mature; concerns for the planet and society as a whole does as well. Assuming this effect cascades, education may be one of the fastest ways to lift the world out of poverty and it's environmental tail spin! As you probably know already; poverty and the environment are caught in a vicious cycle.
- "The economic and political dynamics creating climate change are the same as the ones creating the inequality" - Fritjof Capra
- So what are these dynamics?
	- Poverty often causes people to put pressure on their environment; they need to externalise their costs just to survive. Examples might include: increased pressure on depleted lands to meet nourishment needs, exploitation of natural resources, deforestation, burning waste materials, improper sewage disposal etc. None of this is good for the people or planet. 
	- These people are however the most effected by such environmental problems, only adding to their misery. Land degradation and soil depletion lead to a decline in food production, resource shortage from over exploitation contributes to inflation and improper waste disposal directly impacts the health of those most at risk.
- Concern for people IS concern for planet; a holistic education is key! 




##### Schumacher words
Schumacher College 30th Anniversary Essay Competition
- Today’s education system presents young people with a world still dominated by materialism, consumerism and the heedless exploitation of both people and the planet. It’s hopelessly ‘unfit for purpose’ as we wrestle with today’s converging crises of the Climate Emergency, ecological collapse, racial inequality and worsening social injustice.
- [Schumacher College](https://www.schumachercollege.org.uk/) has pioneered and promoted a very different paradigm of values-based, holistic education over the past 30 years. As part of [our programme of celebrations for the 30th anniversary of the founding of the college](https://www.dartington.org/about/learning/30-years-of-schumacher/), we’re inviting people to write an essay under the title ‘Education as if People and Planet Matter’.
- The essay should be addressed to general readers, and not to either education or sustainability specialists as such. The minimum length of the essay 1,000 words. The maximum length of the essay 1,500 words. The Entry Fee is £10 ( or $15.00 or €15.00) and this fee will cover the administration of the competition, with any surplus going to support learning programmes at Schumacher College.
- The winner will receive a £5,000 cash prize, with an opportunity to present their essay at the anniversary event at Schumacher College in autumn 2021. A £2,000 cash prize will go to the second place, and £1,000 to the third runner-up. The winner and two runners-up will receive their awards at the anniversary event.
- **To enter, complete the below form. Please read the whole form carefully and ensure you consent to the competition terms and conditions. Please direct any enquiries to elaine@resurgence.org. **
- **Competition deadline: 1 July | Winners will be announced: 1 October**
	- We regret we will not be able to contact unsuccessful entrants.
	- The First prize £5,000. The Second Prize £2,000. The Third prize £1,000.


##### Notes and [[Quotes]]
- Ecoliteracy
	- "a sustainable human community must be designed in such a manner that its ways of life, businesses, economy, physical structures, technologies, social institutions and so on, do not interfere with natures inherent ability to sustain life." - Fritjof Capra
	- "Facilitating emergence means creating conditions rather than giving directions, and it also means using the power of authority to empower others." - Fritjof Capra
	- "The economic and political dynamics creating climate change are the same as the ones creating the inequality"
    - https://www.voicesofyouth.org/blog/relationship-between-poverty-and-environment
        - Poverty often causes people to put relatively more pressure on the environment which results in larger families (due to high death rates and insecurity), improper human waste disposal leading to unhealthy living conditions, more pressure on fragile land to meet their needs, over exploitation of natural resources and more deforestation. Insufficient knowledge about agricultural practices can also lead to a decline in crop yield and productivity etc.
        - On the other hand environmental problems add more to the miseries of poor people. Environmental problems cause more suffering among them as environmental damage increases the impact of floods and other environmental catastrophes. Soil erosion, land degradation and deforestation lead to a decline in food production along with a shortage of wood for fuel contribute to inflation. In short, the worst consequences of environmental deterioration, whether they be economical, social, or related to mental or physical wellbeing, are experienced by poor people.
    - https://www.dartington.org/about/learning/30-years-of-schumacher/essay-competition/
        - To provide some context for the theme of the competition, Satish writes: “The present educational system serves the interest of the Industrial Age promoting wasteful production, consumption, and ever-increasing economic growth on a finite planet. This educational system is in urgent need of transformation if we wish to see education remaining relevant to the age of ecology, serving the purpose of a regenerative culture, and sustaining the integrity of our precious Planet Earth.”
    - http://www.clarewgraves.com/source_content/WSP_cc_edit.html
        - I have information on, for example, a group of 7th grade kids. Let's say you find that you have kids in there that are operating at the CP, DQ, ER levels. How best can they learn? How do you actually go about the task of organizing the classroom so that those children can learn and have, in the course of their learning, an optimizing of their chance of moving up the exis­tential staircase? {from the Shalmont school system; work of David Hunt, a former student and part of the Harvey/Hunt/Schroder group; got a truncated systems view on his own}
        - Since people learn in different ways, Graves maintains that educators must develop separate learning systems for people at different levels of existence.
        -  At the D-Q level, a person thinks in terms of absolute right and absolute wrong, and for this type of person the rigid, authoritarian, highly moralistic style of many traditional schools, emphasizing memorizing and spewing back material, may be appropriate.
        - People at the E-R level introduce situationalism and relativism into their way of thinking. To them there may be many answers to a problem, but there is one _best_ answer. They want to comprehend in an impersonal, objective, distant, rational manner. They see learning as a game which has precise rules which, if mastered, will enable them to win the game. They think in terms of analysis, breaking things into their parts, and they prefer to add up their own conception of the parts.
        - People who think in an F-S way are unhappy over the absence of personal relevance in any abstractions that are a part of learning. They think in terms of sensing and apprehending rather than in terms of comprehending. They tend to refuse to deal with anything that analyzes or breaks down a learning experience.
        - For people at the G-T level, knowledge exists in specific settings. The settings differ and so do the knowers. Several interpretations of any phenomenon are always legitimate, depending on the person, his point of view, and his purpose. For students at the G-T level, a teacher’s job is to pose problems, help provide ways to see them, but leave to each person the decision of which answers to accept.
        - The theory of levels goes a long way toward explaining some of the problems currently faced by education, says Graves. In the United States, for example, the concept of education derives primarily from the limiting point of view of people who think only in a righteously moralistic (D-Q level) or technologically objectivistic fashion (E-R). This restricts education to only two of the major forms of human behavior known to exist.
        - In the righteous, absolutistic D-Q framework, there is a right and wrong in everything. There is absolute right in what education should be and absolute right as to how it should be carried out. Any other approach to education is an erroneous frill. From this viewpoint, the purposed of education is to inculcate the students with the right way to think, act, and believe.
        - In the technological or E-R viewpoint, education should strive to make the student think in an objectivistic, positivistic, rational, reasoning way. The goal of education is for the student to have hard facts at his fingertips and be able to reach cold, reasoned conclusions.
        - From Graves’s viewpoint, however, the aim of education should be as follows:
            - (1) To take the open student from thinking levels of lower complexity through successive stages to thinking levels of higher complexity.
            - (2) To provide the closed student with that increase in his knowledge and skills with which he can be comfortable and survive and live better as a human being.
        -  A school or university should have a means of ascertaining the level of thinking complexity of each matriculating student, says Graves. The administrators should then determine whether the student is just entering this form of thinking, consolidating it, or is ready to move on to the next possible way of thinking. If he is just entering the level, he should be grouped with students who are also entering the same system so as to firm up his newly found way of thinking. Open-minded students should be placed in an instructional situation with a teacher who is confronting the same conceptual problem the students are confronted with. Closed students should be grouped with similarly closed fellow students and be instructed by a teacher who is knowledgeable in the complexities of that particular way of living.
-  [Writing an essay guide](https://www.mvorganizing.org/what-are-the-8-elements-of-essay/)

