---
Tags: [Refactor, Principals, Frameworks]
---
Related: [[Commons]] [[Artifacts]] [[Quotes]] [[Elinor Ostrom]]

# Governing the Commons

- **Chapter 1 - Reflections on the commons:**
    - The issue is how best to limit the use of natural resources so as to ensure their long there economic viability. Similar situations occur on diverse scales from small neighbourhoods to the entire planet.
    - Neither the state nor the market is uniformly successful in enabling individuals to sustain long-term, productive use of natural resource systems.
    - This book is an effort to (1) critiques the foundations of policy analysis as applied to many natural resources, (2) present empirical examples of successful and unsuccessful efforts to govern and manage such resources, and (3) begin the effort to develop better intellectual tools to understand the capabilities and limitations of self governing institutions for regulation many types of resources.
    - We will examine the** three models** most frequently used for recommending state or market solutions. Followed by empirical alternatives that go beyond market or state. Then will attempt to explain how communities of individuals fashion different ways of governing the commons.
    - Model 1: tragedy of the commons - Optional; cooperative, incentivised non-cooperative. Many studies conclude that were a number of users have access to a common-pool resource, the total of the resource units withdrawn from the resource will be greater than the optimal economic level of withdrawal. Much of the world is dependent on resources that are subject to the possibility of a tragedy of the commons.
    - Model 2: the prisoner's dilemma game - non cooperative game where all players possess complete information. Each player has a dominant strategy in the sense that the player is always better off choosing this strategy - to defect - no matter what the other player chooses. When both player choose their dominant strategy, they produce an equilibrium that is the third-best result for both. This is not Pareto-optimal, such occurs when there is no other outcome strictly preferred by at least one player that is at least as good for the others. In prisoners dilemma the equilibrium outcome is Pareto-inferior and exhibits a fascinating [[Paradox]] where individuals rational strategies lead to collectively irrational outcomes.
    - The logic of collective action - Mancur Olsen; specifically challenges the grand optimism expressed in group theory: that individuals with common interests would voluntarily act so as to try to further those interests. “One who cannot be excluded from obtaining the benefits of a collective good once the good is produced has little incentive to contribute voluntarily to the provision of that good”. This is the free rider problem and applies to large groups, intermediate sizes depend on how noticeable each person actions are.
    - Olsen asserts “what makes the models so dangerous - when they are used metaphorically as the foundation for policy - is that the constraints that are assumed to be fixed fo the purpose of analysis are taken on faith as being fixed in empirical settings”.
    - **"As long as individuals are viewed as prisoners, policy prescriptions will address this metaphor. I would rather address the question of how to enhance the capabilities of those involved to change the constraining rules of the game to lead to outcomes other than remorseless tragedies"**.
    - Much written on CPRs have uncritically accepted the earlier models and presumption of remorseless tragedy.
    - Leviathan as the only way: many uncritical papers assume the state as the only way.
    - Little consideration is given to the cost of creating andmaintaining such an agency. This is seen as exogenous to the problem and is not included as a parameter of Game 2.
    - Privatisation as the “only way” - “the only way to avoid the tragedy of the commons in natural resources and wildlife is to end the common-property system by creating a system of private property rights”. Smith stressed that it is by “creating a resource as a common property that we become locked its inexorable destruction”.
    - However: If the location of lush growth changes dramatically from year to year, dividing the commons may-impoverish both herders and lead to overgrazing in those parts where forage is temporarily inadequate. Of course it will b possible for the herder who has extra fodder in one year to another header. Alternatively, it will be possible for herders to set up an insurance scheme to share the risk of an uncertain environment however the setup costs would be substantial and will not be needed so long as the herders share fodder and risk by jointly sharing a larger grazing area.
    - In reard to non stationary resources, such as water and fisheries, it is unclear what the establishment of private  rights means.
    - The "only" way: Analysts who find an empirical situation with a structure presumed to be a commons dilemma often call for the imposition of a solution by an external actor: The “only way** to solve a commons dilemma is by doing X.
    - Both centralisation advocates and privatisation advocates except as a central tenet that institutional change must come from outside and be imposed on the individuals affected. Despite sharing faith in the necessity and efficacy “of the state” to change institutions so as to increase efficiency, the institutional changes they recommend could hardly be further apart. If one recommendation is correct the other cannot be. I argue many solutions exist to cope with many different problems instead of presuming that optimal institutional solutions can be designed easily and imposed at low-cost by external authorities. I argue that “getting the institutions right” is a difficult, time-consuming, conflict invoking process. It is a process that requires reliable information about time and place variables as well as a broad repertoire of culturally acceptable rules. I argue that the capacity of individuals to extricate themselves from various types of dilemma situation varies from situation to situation. Instead of basing policy on the presumption that the individuals involved are helpless I wish to learn more from the experience of individuals in field settings.
    - Institutions are rarely either private or public - “the market” or “the state” many successful CPR institutions are rich mixtures of in “private-like” and “public-like” institutions defying classification in a sterile dichotomy. By “successful,” I mean institutions that enable individuals to achieve productive outcomes in situations where temptations to freeride and shirk are ever present. A competitive market - the epitome of private institutions - is itself a public good. No market can exist long without underlying public institutions to support it. In field settings, public and other private institutions frequently are intermeshed and depend on one another, rather than existing in isolated worlds.
    - An alternative solution - game 5: The herders can make binding contracts to commit themselves to a cooperative strategy that they themselves will work out.
    - To represent this arrangement within and non-cooperative framework, additional rules must be overtly included in the game structure. A binding contract is interpreted, within noncooperative game theory is one that is unfailing enforced by an external actor - Just as we interpret in the penalty posited earlier as being unfailingly enforced by the central authority.
    - A simple way to represent this is to add one parameter to the payoffs and a strategy to both herders’ strategy sets. The parameter is the cost of enforcing a will be noted denoted by __e__. contracts are not enforceable, however, unless agreed to unanimously by the herders. Any proposal made by one herder that did not involve an equal sharing of the carrying capacity and of enforcement costs would be vetoed by the other Herder in their negotiations. Consequently, the only feasible agreement - and the equilibrium of the resulting game - is for both herders to share equally the sustainable yield levels of the meadow and the costs of enforcing their agreement so long as each herders share of the cost of enforcement is less than 10.
    - Might it be possible for the hardest to hire a private agent to take on the role of an enforcer? This is not as far-fetched as it might seem at first. Many long-term business exchanges have the structure of a prisoner's dilemma.
    - To reduce enforcement cost a frequent practice is to use a private arbitrator role in civil courts as the mechanism to achieve enforcement
    - A self-financed contract-enforcement game allowed to participate in the situation to exercise greater control over decisions about who will be allowed to graze and what limits will be placed on the numbers of animals, as compared with either Game 2 or Game 3.
    - The arbitrator simply helps the parties find methods to resolve disputes that arise within the set of working rules to which the parties themselves have agreed.Enforcement arrangements make it possible for long term arrangements.
    - The self interest as those who negotiated the contract will lead them to monitor each other and a report observed infractions so that the contract is enforced. A regulatory agency, on the other hand, always has to hire some monitors. The regulatory agency then faces the principal-agent problem of how to ensure that its monitors do their own job. **### GAME 5 (self governance) ASSUMES PARTIES CAN MONITOR EACH OTHER. CENTRAL AUTHORITIES ASSUME GAME 2 IS POSSIBLE! ****—————————————————————————break **
    - A problem for consideration is that games in which enforces have been arranged for by mutual agreement, may be mistaken by analysts and public officials for games in which there have been no agreements about how to cooperate and enforce agreements. When enforcement mechanism is not an external governmental agency some Analysts presume that there is no enforcement. That is often why game 5 is mistaken for game 1. However a self financed contract enforcement game is no panacea. Such institutional arrangements may have many weaknesses, in many settings: e.g. the herders can overestimate or underestimate the carrying capacity of the meadow or their monitoring can break, but this is also the case for private institutions.
    - Alayana fisheries are a good example of an idealised case. On their fishing grounds the production capabilities of each site optimised all fishing boats have equal chances to fish the best spots and resources are not wasted searching for fighting over a site. No signs of over capitalisation are apparent. The fishermen are self monitoring based on a collaboratively designed rule set, which if designed by another entity would require hiring full time monitors!
    - The key to Ostroms argument is some individuals have broken out of the trap inherent in The Commons dilemma, whereas others continue remorsefully trapped into destroying their own resources. So she asks; what are the differences between those who have broken shackles of The Commons dilemma and those who have not. Perhaps they simply have no capacity to **communicate** with one another, no way to develop **trust**, and no sense of a **common future**. Alternatively,  **powerful individuals** who stand to gain from the current situation, while others lose, **may block** efforts by the less powerful to change the rules of the game. such groups may need some form of external assistance to break out of the perverse logic of their situation.
    - The differences between those who have and those who have not extricate themselves from the commons dilemmas may also have to do with factors **outside** the domain of those affected. Some participants do not have the **autonomy** to change their own institutional structures and are **prevented** **from making constructive changes by external authorities** or are indifferent to the perversities of the commons dilemma, or may even stand gain for it.
    - Also, there is the possibility that external changes may sweet rapidly over a group, giving them **insufficient time** to adjust their internal structures to avoid the suboptimal outcomes.  Some groups suffer from **perverse incentive systems** that are themselves the result of policies pursued by central authorities.z**SELLING GIVETH: As long as analysts presume that individuals cannot change such situations themselves, they do not ask what internal or external variables can enhance or impede the efforts of communities of individuals to deal creatively and constructively with perverse problems such as tragedy of the commons.**
    - The centrists presume that unified authorities will operation failed as they have been designed to do in the textbooks -  determining the best policies To Be adopted for a resource based on valid scientific theories and adequate information.
    - Those advocating the private property approach presume that the most efficient use patterns for CPR will actually result from dividing the rights to access and control the resources.
    - Centralizers in the private eyes is frequently advocate oversimplified idealized institutions -  paradoxically, almost ”Institution-free” (beuroracy-free) institutions.
    - An assertion that the imposition of private property rights is necessarily tells us nothing about how the bundle of Rights is to be defined, how the various attributes of the goods involved will be measured, who will pay for the costs of excluding non-owners from access, how conflicts over rights will be adjudicated, or how the residual interests of the right holders in the resource system itself will be organised.
    - **Policy based on metaphors can be harmful - **Understand that assumptions made when predicting have a statistical likelihood of being wrong. See the [[Cobra effect]] on wikipedia for an entertaining anecdote.
    - **SELLING GIVETH:** An important challenge facing policy scientists to develop theories of human organisation based on realistic assessment of human capabilities and limitations in dealing with a variety of situations that inherently share some or all aspects of a tragedy of the commons. **Empirically validated theories of human organisation will be essential ingredients of a policy** science that can inform decisions about the likely consequences of a multitude of ways of organising human activities.Theoretical enquiry involves of search for regularities. It involves abstraction from the complexity of a field setting, followed by the positioning of theoretical variables that underlie observed complexities. Specific models of a theory involve further abstraction and simplification for the purpose of a still finer analysis of the logical relationships among variables in a closed system. As a theorist, and at times a modeller, **I see these efforts at the core of policy science.**
    - The power of a theory is exactly proportional to the diversity of situations it can explain. All theories, however, have limits. Confusing a model - such as that of a perfectly competitive market - with the theory of which it is one representation can limit the applicability still further.
    - **Unfortunately**, many analysts - in academia, special interest groups, **governments**, and the press - still **presume** common pool dilemmas are all dilemmas in which the participants themselves cannot avoid over producing suboptimal results, and in some cases disastrous results.
    - **SELLING GIVETH:** __What's missing from the policy analyst tool kit - and from the set of accepted, well-developed  theories of human organization - is an adequately specified theory of collective action whereby a group of principal's can organise themselves voluntarily to retain the residuals of their own efforts.__ Examples of self-organized enterprises abound. Most law firms are obvious examples: a group of lawyers will pull their assets to purchase a library and pay for joint secretarial and research assistance. They will develop their own internal governance mechanisms and formulas for allocating costs and benefits to the partners.
    - If the theories being used in a policy science do not include the possibility of self-organized collective action, then the importance of a court system that can be used by self organising groups to monitor and enforce contracts will not be recognised.
    - **SELLING GIVETH:** As an institutionalist studying empirical phenomena, I presume that individuals try to solve problems as effectively as they can. That assumption imposes a discipline on me. Instead of assuming some individuals are incompetent, evil, or irrational, and others are omniscient, **I presume that individuals have very similar limited capabilities to reason and figure out the structure of complex environments.** My organism is a type of human situation. I focus entirely on small-scale CPRs, where the CPR itself is located within one country and the number of individuals affected varies from 50 to 15,000 persons who are heavily dependent on CPR for economic returns.
    - There are limits on the type of CPR studied here: (1) renewable rather than non-renewable resources, (2) situations where substantial scarcity exists, rather than abundance, and (3) Situations in which the users can substantially harm one another, but not situations in which participants can produce major external harm for others. (thus asymmetrical pollution problems are excluded, as is any situation in which a group can form a cartel and control a sufficient part of the market to affect the price).
- **Chapter 2 (p29)- An institutional approach to the study of self-organisation and setf-governance in CPR situations:**
    - **GIVETH PROBLEM STATEMENT:** "The central question in this study is how a group of principal's who are in an interdependent situation can organise and govern themselves to obtain continuing joint benefits when all face temptations to freeride, shirk, or otherwise act opportunistically."
    - **GIVETH PROBLEM STATEMENT:** "Parallel questions have to do with the combinations of variables that will (1) increase the initial likelihood of self-organization (2) enhance the capabilities of individuals to continue self-organised efforts over time, or (3) exceed the capacity of self-organisation to solve CPR problems with external assistance of some form."
        - **The CPR situation: **The term “common pool resource” refers to a natural man-made resource system that is sufficiently large as to make it costly (but not impossible) to exclude potential beneficiaries from obtaining benefits from its use. To understand the process of organising and governing CPR, **it is essential to distinguish between** the **resource system** and the **flow of resource units** produced by the system while still recognising the dependence of the one on the other.
        - Resource systems best thought of as stock variables that capable, under favorable conditions, of producing a maximum quantity of a flow variable without harming the stock or the resource system itself e.g. oceans or bridges.
        - Resource units are what individuals appropriate or use from the resource systems (fish from fisheries, grass from a grazing area, funds from an organisation).The **distinction** between he resource as __a__ **stock** and the harvest of use units as __a__ **flow** is especially useful in connection with renewable resources, where it is possible to define a replenishment rate and thus sustainability.
        - **UNICORN DAC:** The process of withdrawing resource units from a resource system we term “**appropriation**”. Those who withdraw units are called “**appropriators**”, they may also use them as inputs to a production process. The term appropriator can be used to refer to herders, fishers, irrigators, commuters or others using the resources of a system. The analysis of scarce, renewable resources is made from the perspective of the appropriators. This analysis relates to situations in which CPR appropriate as have no power in a final goods market, nor do their actions have a significant impact on the environment of others living outside the range of this CPR.
        - Those who arrange for provision of a CPR called “**providers**” or “**provisioners**”. The term “**producer**” refers to anyone who actually **constructs**, **repairs**, or takes actions to ensure the long-term **sustenance** of the resource system itself. Frequently, providers and producers are the same individuals, but they do not have to be.
        - Failure to distinguish between the subtractability of the resource units and the joint use of the resource system has in the past contributed to confusion about the relationship of CPR to public or collective goods. In a particular CPR, if problems associated with the appropriation of subtractable resource units become severe, local appropriators may refuse to undertake provision activities.
        - Rational appropriators in complex and uncertain conditions (uncertainty, incomplete info, asymmetric info, what are boundaries of resource? time horrizons>discount rates):
        - **ONBOARDING**: A major source of uncertainty is lack of knowledge. The exact structure of the resource system itself - it's boundaries and internal characteristics - must be established. Ascertaining the structure of the resource system may come about as a by-product or extended use with careful observation, as in the case of appropriating from a fishing ground or grazing range. moreover, this folk knowledge must be preserved and passed along from one generation to the next.
        - Uncertainty stemming from lack of knowledge may be reduced over time as a result of skillful pooling and blending of scientific knowledge and local time and place Norwich. **Uncertainty reduction is costly and never fully accomplished.** By definition, trial and error methods involve error, perhaps even disasters. Overtime, appropriators gain a more accurate understanding of the physical world and what to expect from the behaviour of others.
        - The symmetry of information available to appropriators will vary from situation to situation depending on how expensive it is to acquire information and the rules used for disseminating information to appropriators.
        - SAD TRUTHS: Time horizons effect expectations. The discount rate applied to future yields derived from a  particular CPR Differ substantially across various types of appropriators. Discount rates are also affected by the general name shared by the individuals living in a particular sis itociety, or even a local community, regarding the relative importance of the future as compared with the present.
        - Every group there will be individuals who will ignore norms and act opportunistically when given a chance. There are also situations in which the potential benefits will be so high that even strongly committed individuals will break norms. Consequently, the adoption of norms of behaviour will not reduce opportunistic behaviour to Zero. **Opportunistic behaviour is a possibility that must be dealt with by all appropriators trying to solve CPR problems.** __Shared norms that reduce the cost of monitoring and sanctioning activities can be viewed as social capital to be utilised in solving CPR problems.__
        - __There are also contingent strategies and as Illustrated in fig 2.1 there are four internal variables that affect an individual's actions; expected benefits, expected costs, internal norms and discount rates.__
        - __FAMILIAR?:__ __Individuals selecting strategies jointly produce outcomes in an external world that impinge on future expectations concerning the benefits and costs of actions.__ The most one can say is that the individuals in such situations are engaged in a **trial-and-error effort** to learn more about the results of their actions so they can evaluate the benefits and costs more effectively over time. Each individual must take into account choices of others when assessing personal choices. The key fact of life for **coappropriators** is that they're tied together in a **lattice of interdependence** so long as they continue to **share a single CPR.** The physical interdependence does not disappear when effective institutional rules are utilised in governance and management of the CPR. The physical interdependence remains; what changes is the result of the appropriators obtain.
        - As long as appropriators stay “unorganised”, they cannot achieve a joint return as high as they could have received if they had organised in some way to undertake collective action. At the most general level, the problem facing CPR appropriators is one of organising: how to change the situation from one in which appropriators act independently, to one in which they adopt coordinated strategies to obtain higher joint benefits or reduce their joint harm.
        - **GIVETH: That does not necessarily mean creating an organisation**. Organising is a process; an organisation is the result of that process. An organisation of individuals who constitute an ongoing enterprise is one form of organisation that can result from the process of organising.
        - PATTERNS & PROCESS: The core of organisation involves changes that order activities so that sequential, contingent, and frequency-dependent decisions are introduced where simultaneous, noncontingent, and frequency-independent actions had prevailed.
        - TRANSFORMATION INTRO: The costs involved in transforming a situation from one in which individuals act independently to one in which they coordinate activities can be quite high. and the benefits produced a shared by all appropriate is, whether or not they share any of the costs of transforming the situation. The theory of the firm and the theory of the state can each provide an explanation for one way in which collective action can be achieved each involves the creation of a new institutional arrangement in which  the rules in use a fundamentally different from those that structure independent action. By considering both solutions we can better illustrate the absence of a similar theory that would identify the mechanisms by which a group of individuals could organise themselves.
        - Theory of the firm: Entrepreneurs recognise opportunity to increase return when individuals are potentially involved in an interdependent relationship. They negotiate contracts with various participants specifying how to coordinate. Participation is voluntary, but the entrepreneur is given discretion over some range of choices. The participants become the Agents of the entrepreneur. After paying each of the agents, the entrepreneur retains residual profit (or absorbs losses). Consequently there is motivation to organise as efficiently as possible; the entrepreneur seeks to minimise overheads by drafting efficient contracts and monitoring contractors.
        - Theory of the state: Instead of an entrepreneur, we posit a ruler who recognises that substantial benefits can be obtained by organising some activities. if a ruler games Monopoly on the use of force, the ruler can use coercion as a fundamental mechanism to organise a diversity of human activities that will produce collective benefits. The ruler obtains taxs, labour, or other resources from subjects by threatening them with severe sanctions if they do not provide the resources. The “wise” ruler uses the resources that obtained to increase the general level of economic well-being of the subjects to a degree sufficient that ruler can increase tax revenues while being able to reduce the more oppressive uses of coercion. Rulers,  like entrepreneurs, keep the residuals. **There is no mechanism, such as a competitive market, that would exert pressure on the ruler to design efficient institutions.**
        - **THE GOAL: There is no theory developed that provides a coherent account of how to deal with collective action problems.** There is no credible accounts of how **a set of principals,** faced with a collective action problem, can solve (1) the problem of supplying a new set of institutions, (2) the problem with making credible commitments, and (3) the problem of mutual monitoring.
        - SELLING GIVETH: The problem of supply: Institutions are demanded because they enhance the welfare of rational actors. The problem is: Why are they supplied? Because play new set of rules is the equivalent to providing another public good, the problem faced by a set of principles is that obtaining these new rules is a second-order collective dilemma. Even if the payoffs was symmetric and all persons were made [equally] better off from the introduction of the institutions, they would still be a failure of supply, since the institution would provide a collective good and rational individuals would seek to security benefits for free.  the incentives to free-ride would undermine the incentives to organise a solution to the collective dilemma. It is subject to the very incentive problem is supposed to resolve. However some communities solve this and in Bates view the mechanisms likely rest on trust and a sense of belonging.
        - The problem of credible commitment: How does one appropriator credibly commit himself or herself to follow a rotation system when everyone knows that the temptations to break commitments will be extremely strong in future time periods? How do past Commitments bind the appropriator to future sacrifices? How do they know that commitments are actually being kept? No one wants to be a sucker. External coercion is at times a sleight-of-hand solution, Because the theorist does not address what motivates the external enforcer to monitor behaviour and impose sanctions. The immediate issue however is there a self organised group must solve the commitment problem without an external for enforcer. **Unless the monitoring problem can be solved, credible commitments cannot be made.**
        - The problem of mutual monitoring: Punishment almost invariably is costly to the punisher, while the benefits from punishment diffusely distributed over the members. It is, in fact, a public good: to provide it, one would need second-order selective incentives which would, however, run into third-order free rider problems.
        - **Framing enquiry: **When appropriators face appropriation problems, they are concerned with the effects that various methods of allocating a fixed, or time-independent, quantity resource units will have on the net return obtained by the appropriators. Provision problems concern the effects of various ways of assigning responsibility for building, restoring, or maintaining the resource system over time, as well as the well-being of the appropriators. Appropriation problems are concerned with the allocation of flow; provision problems are concerned with the stock. Appropriation problems are time-independent; provision problems are time-dependent.
        - APPROPRIATION PROBLEMS/OVERWORKING: in regard to appropriation the key problem in a CPR environment is how to allocate a fixed, time independent quantity of resource units so as to avoid rent dissipation and reduce uncertainty and conflict over the assignment of rights. The structure of a limited access CPR is not a PD game and lacks a dominant strategy for each participant. **The incentives of appropriators who act independently, however, will lead them to over invest in any input factor that is not constrained under the current rules. PAIR/TRIAD.**
        - A second type of appropriation problem relates to assignment of spatial or temporal access to the resource. This occurs because spatial and temporal distributions of resource units frequently are heterogeneous and uncertain.
        - PROVISION PROBLEMS: Analyses of provision problems focus on the time-dependent, productive nature of investment in the resource itself. Provision problems may occur on the supply side, the demand side, or on both sides. The **supply-side** problem faced in a CPR environment is related to the **construction** of the resource itself and it's **maintenance** (which can be tricky for a single party to mange, let alone a group). Demand-side provision problems involve regulating withdrawal rates so that they do not adversely affect the resource itself.
        - **Multiple levels of analysis: **Most analysis focus on a single level, most often operational. At this level, one assumes that both the rules of the game and the physical/technological constraints are given and will not change during the time frame of analysis. Individuals who have [[Self-Organisation]] capabilities switch back and forth between operational-, collective-, and constitutional-choice arenas, just as managers of production firm switch back and forth between producing products within a set technology, introducing a new technology, and investing resources in technology development.
        - “Institutions” can be defined as sets of working rules that I used to determine who is eligible to make decisions in some arena, what actions are allowed or constrained, what aggregation rules will be used, what procedures must be followed, what information must or must not be provided, and what payoffs will be assigned to individuals dependent on their actions.
        - All rules are nested in another set of rules that define have first set of rules can be changed. This nesting of rules within rules at several levels is similar to the nesting of computer languages at several levels and is **dependent on capabilities at other levels.**
        - It is useful to distinguish three levels of rules that cumulatively affect the actions taken and outcomes obtained in CPRs. __Operational rules__ directly affect the day-to-day decisions made by appropriators concerning when, where, and how to withdraw resource units.
        - __Collective choice rules__ indirectly affect operational choices. these are the rules that are used by apropriators, their officials, or external authorities in making policies -  the operational rules - about how a CPR should be managed. __Constitutional choice rules__ affect operational activities and results through their effects in determining who is eligible and determining the specific rules to be used in crafting their set of collective-choice rules that in turn affect the set of operational rules.
        - TIERED SUMMARY: **The process of appropriation, provision, monitoring, and enforcement occur at the operational level. The processes of policy-making, management, and adjudication of policy decisions occur at a collective-choice level. Formulation, governance, adjudication, and modification of constitutional decisions occur at the constitutional level.**
        - When doing analysis at any one level, the analyst keeps the variables of a deeper level fixed for the purpose of analysis. Otherwise the structure of the problem with unravel. But [[Self-Organisation]] and self-governing individuals trying to cope with problems in field settings go back and forth across levels as a key strategy for solving problems.
- **3 - Analysing long enduring, self-organized and self-governed CPRs p58**
