---
Tags: [Principals, Heuristics]
---
Related: [[Complexity]] [[Cybernetics]] [[The Cybernetic Brain]] [[Andrew Pickering]] [[Second Order Science]]

# Requisite Variety
- [Cybernetic](http://www.decisionintegrity.co.uk/DIL%20Transdisciplinary%20World%20Model%20-%20Hodgson.pdf) Analysis
- A key concept in [[Cybernetics]] is variety. This is the number of possible states of a system. Needless to say, the number of possible states in the actualworld system is astronomical. Ashby’s Law of [[Requisite Variety]] (Ashby, 1958) states that only variety can absorb variety. Yet, we humans with low variety [[Governance]] claim to ‘run the system’. In [[Cybernetics]], variety engineering is the skill of designing [[Regulation]] and feedback such that [[Requisite Variety]] is achieved. The term requisite implies that absolute matching is not necessary (or feasible) but that there is a minimum [[Complexity]] required in the regulator of a system. If this is not the case, the regulator is too simplistic, then its intended control actions are likely to make the system more out of control. The areas of diversity that are interacting and need to be regulated are matched by a commensurate diversity in the guidance system; variety attenuation must be intelligently designed.

- This point is very critical when we consider the resilience of social ecological systems. Applying the Conant–Ashby Theorem (Conant and Ashby,1970), that ‘every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system’, we are faced with the challenge that, whether we are considering a cityor the whole planet, resilient [[Governance]] should require extremely well-designed [[Governance]] models that are based on consideration of the whole as a system. Of course, in extremis, that would take the world to regulate the world. Dror (2001) has pointed out that the capacity to govern on current models and practices is taxed beyond its limits. Apart from considerations of the quality of those who lead, he points to rapid non-linear change, increasing uncertainty and inconceivability and multiplying [[Complexity]]. 
- The implications he summarizes as follows: ‘Consequently, before identifying the tasks of [[Governance]] and working out required redesigns, we need to look at the environments within which [[Governance]] will have to operate in the foreseeable future and the problem domains with which it will have to cope.’(Dror, 2001, p. 38)
- Stafford Beer (Beer, 1974) pointed out very clearly that the manner in which [[Governance]] is structured is ill suited to real world [[Complexity]]. ‘We discovered that viable systems are bombarded continuously with high variety stimuli, the variety of which has to be attenuated if the system is not to be overloaded. The attenuation must be done according to a pattern, if it is not an arbitrary discord. If that pattern is to have survival value (which is a necessity for a viable system) then it must be a regulatory model of whatever is regulated. Then it follows it has to be a central function of the system, because only the system as a whole can have a model of its own relationship with its own environment.’ (Beer, 1974 p. 71)
