---
Tags: []
---
Related: 
# Schumacher College 30th Anniversary Essay Competition

## Details from Schumacher
Schumacher College 30th Anniversary Essay Competition
- Today’s education system presents young people with a world still dominated by materialism, consumerism and the heedless exploitation of both people and the planet. It’s hopelessly ‘unfit for purpose’ as we wrestle with today’s converging crises of the Climate Emergency, ecological collapse, racial inequality and worsening social injustice.
- [Schumacher College](https://www.schumachercollege.org.uk/) has pioneered and promoted a very different paradigm of values-based, holistic education over the past 30 years. As part of [our programme of celebrations for the 30th anniversary of the founding of the college](https://www.dartington.org/about/learning/30-years-of-schumacher/), we’re inviting people to write an essay under the title ‘Education as if People and Planet Matter’.
- The essay should be addressed to general readers, and not to either education or sustainability specialists as such. The minimum length of the essay 1,000 words. The maximum length of the essay 1,500 words. The Entry Fee is £10 ( or $15.00 or €15.00) and this fee will cover the administration of the competition, with any surplus going to support learning programmes at Schumacher College.
- The winner will receive a £5,000 cash prize, with an opportunity to present their essay at the anniversary event at Schumacher College in autumn 2021. A £2,000 cash prize will go to the second place, and £1,000 to the third runner-up. The winner and two runners-up will receive their awards at the anniversary event.
- **To enter, complete the below form. Please read the whole form carefully and ensure you consent to the competition terms and conditions. Please direct any enquiries to elaine@resurgence.org. **
- **Competition deadline: 1 July | Winners will be announced: 1 October**
	- We regret we will not be able to contact unsuccessful entrants.
	- The First prize £5,000. The Second Prize £2,000. The Third prize £1,000.


### Notes and [[Quotes]] for building the article
- Ecoliteracy
	- "a sustainable human community must be designed in such a manner that its ways of life, businesses, economy, physical structures, technologies, social institutions and so on, do not interfere with natures inherent ability to sustain life." - Fritjof Capra
	- "Facilitating emergence means creating conditions rather than giving directions, and it also means using the power of authority to empower others." - Fritjof Capra
	- "The economic and political dynamics creating climate change are the same as the ones creating the inequality"
    - https://www.voicesofyouth.org/blog/relationship-between-poverty-and-environment
        - Poverty often causes people to put relatively more pressure on the environment which results in larger families (due to high death rates and insecurity), improper human waste disposal leading to unhealthy living conditions, more pressure on fragile land to meet their needs, over exploitation of natural resources and more deforestation. Insufficient knowledge about agricultural practices can also lead to a decline in crop yield and productivity etc.
        - On the other hand environmental problems add more to the miseries of poor people. Environmental problems cause more suffering among them as environmental damage increases the impact of floods and other environmental catastrophes. Soil erosion, land degradation and deforestation lead to a decline in food production along with a shortage of wood for fuel contribute to inflation. In short, the worst consequences of environmental deterioration, whether they be economical, social, or related to mental or physical wellbeing, are experienced by poor people.
    - https://www.dartington.org/about/learning/30-years-of-schumacher/essay-competition/
        - To provide some context for the theme of the competition, Satish writes: “The present educational system serves the interest of the Industrial Age promoting wasteful production, consumption, and ever-increasing economic growth on a finite planet. This educational system is in urgent need of transformation if we wish to see education remaining relevant to the age of ecology, serving the purpose of a regenerative culture, and sustaining the integrity of our precious Planet Earth.”
    - http://www.clarewgraves.com/source_content/WSP_cc_edit.html
        - I have information on, for example, a group of 7th grade kids. Let's say you find that you have kids in there that are operating at the CP, DQ, ER levels. How best can they learn? How do you actually go about the task of organizing the classroom so that those children can learn and have, in the course of their learning, an optimizing of their chance of moving up the exis­tential staircase? {from the Shalmont school system; work of David Hunt, a former student and part of the Harvey/Hunt/Schroder group; got a truncated systems view on his own}
        - Since people learn in different ways, Graves maintains that educators must develop separate learning systems for people at different levels of existence.
        -  At the D-Q level, a person thinks in terms of absolute right and absolute wrong, and for this type of person the rigid, authoritarian, highly moralistic style of many traditional schools, emphasizing memorizing and spewing back material, may be appropriate.
        - People at the E-R level introduce situationalism and relativism into their way of thinking. To them there may be many answers to a problem, but there is one _best_ answer. They want to comprehend in an impersonal, objective, distant, rational manner. They see learning as a game which has precise rules which, if mastered, will enable them to win the game. They think in terms of analysis, breaking things into their parts, and they prefer to add up their own conception of the parts.
        - People who think in an F-S way are unhappy over the absence of personal relevance in any abstractions that are a part of learning. They think in terms of sensing and apprehending rather than in terms of comprehending. They tend to refuse to deal with anything that analyzes or breaks down a learning experience.
        - For people at the G-T level, knowledge exists in specific settings. The settings differ and so do the knowers. Several interpretations of any phenomenon are always legitimate, depending on the person, his point of view, and his purpose. For students at the G-T level, a teacher’s job is to pose problems, help provide ways to see them, but leave to each person the decision of which answers to accept.
        - The theory of levels goes a long way toward explaining some of the problems currently faced by education, says Graves. In the United States, for example, the concept of education derives primarily from the limiting point of view of people who think only in a righteously moralistic (D-Q level) or technologically objectivistic fashion (E-R). This restricts education to only two of the major forms of human behavior known to exist.
        - In the righteous, absolutistic D-Q framework, there is a right and wrong in everything. There is absolute right in what education should be and absolute right as to how it should be carried out. Any other approach to education is an erroneous frill. From this viewpoint, the purposed of education is to inculcate the students with the right way to think, act, and believe.
        - In the technological or E-R viewpoint, education should strive to make the student think in an objectivistic, positivistic, rational, reasoning way. The goal of education is for the student to have hard facts at his fingertips and be able to reach cold, reasoned conclusions.
        - From Graves’s viewpoint, however, the aim of education should be as follows:
            - (1) To take the open student from thinking levels of lower complexity through successive stages to thinking levels of higher complexity.
            - (2) To provide the closed student with that increase in his knowledge and skills with which he can be comfortable and survive and live better as a human being.
        -  A school or university should have a means of ascertaining the level of thinking complexity of each matriculating student, says Graves. The administrators should then determine whether the student is just entering this form of thinking, consolidating it, or is ready to move on to the next possible way of thinking. If he is just entering the level, he should be grouped with students who are also entering the same system so as to firm up his newly found way of thinking. Open-minded students should be placed in an instructional situation with a teacher who is confronting the same conceptual problem the students are confronted with. Closed students should be grouped with similarly closed fellow students and be instructed by a teacher who is knowledgeable in the complexities of that particular way of living.
-  [Writing an essay guide](https://www.mvorganizing.org/what-are-the-8-elements-of-essay/)
