---
Tags: []
---
Related: 
# Alignment
### ET Community Call and csDAOs
This note seeks to integrate the various moving pieces in the Regen ecosystem pertaining to Foundation activities. It's not complete but paints a picture of what might be for the benefit of Will and Austin. It includes discussion from the alignment session with Revs and Gijs.

Starting at the top we have a ET community call from which we can imagine a speculative future. This 'proposal' is offered in the spirit of feedforward. 

The first thing to think about in that regard is the release of Ledger 4.0 which includes the groups module. Its currently being audited and MAY be ready in about two weeks time based on estimates I've recieved from Ryan. This is not certain but offers a starting point.

Austin suggested an inclination towards enDAOing participants from this call during the last session but its perhaps worth generalising towards the larger Regen community. The commission generated by this DAO can reward participants from the ET and IST for their service and attention. I'd call it a community service centre or similar. 

This csDAO would perhaps be a multi-sig, with Ledger 4.0 bringing the groups module and authz feature online we could onboard both groups into seperate DAOs and use authz to sign the multi-sigs wallet transactions (e.g. allocate and approve spends).

Sending small alloctaions to individuals shouldn't be a regulatory issue but larger csDAOs would face such uncertainties, especially in India. The foundation could theoretically manage the fiducary duty for the csDAO for now and outsource this responsibility to other platforms in the future (e.g. 2030.io, Coinbase or Open Collective).

We would need a concrete number on the allocation size to move forward with these ideas. Austin and Will are probably the directive agencies for this. 

TL;DR

Josh does community DAO onboarding once ledger 4 is released.
Austin determins the allocation.
Gijs would work with the IST community to do user testing (recieve tokens to a wallet and upscaling from there)

---

### Twitter Space / IST Community Call

Tomorrow is the first validator ecosystem resiliance twitter space; the aim here is an educated voting constituency as they sign off on network/community pool spends. Ideally a 'shark tank' style event would be cool to engage validators and get their input on community spend proposals but they will need incentivisation to keep participating. The recent RFP response around our delegation strategy allocated 10% for qualitive assessment led by the foundation/RND. This could incentivise regular participation in the Twitter space and attendence be a metric; eventually this could germinate into a buddy system that addresses bioregionalism as the call is currently setup directly after the IST Community call. This could be a good sequence to follow on further iterations.


---

### Newsletter

These spaces can further tie into the newsletter. Segmentation is needed still so that we're speaking to specific audiences. Josh would handle the tech community and help translate for Gijs who would ensure suitability for land stewards. 

---

### Registry
the Registry is a pretty key product in the Regen ecosystem; perhaps even the wider purpose of enDAOment depending on perspective. Currently the Registry is thinking about the Data and Groups modulse as well as workflows and feedback loops. 
- Foundation collects user stories (Gijs)
- Registry collects use cases from discord threads and conversations (Rebecca)
- Ledger gets informed (Josh) 



W34L has become a guild of methodology developers and ontological designers which ties in well to the science teams needs. 


Non-Natives guides to data module and groups
Verification
Create credit class, then what?
Gijs to collect user stories in Notion
Rebecca to collect discord threads and conversations in Notion

Science team as education, LOA as marketing

https://www.notion.so/regenfoundation/Ledger-Gov-RND-RF-775fd85e0b4a4e38b60eec2607ed6953