---
Tags: [Course]
---

# Capra Course L10

- [Link]
    - Summary
        - In this lecture, I turn to the ecological dimension of life, and in particular to the issue of ecological sustainability. I begin with the definition of “ecosystem,“ the basic ecological unit, and I emphasize that the science of ecology is inherently multidisciplinary. The systems view of life seems to provide an ideal framework and language for the study of ecology. Indeed, the early development of ecology went hand in hand with that of systems thinking. I briefly discuss the foundational concepts of ecology — ecological communities, cycles and flows, food webs, ecological succession, biomes, and the biosphere — within this historical context (__Section 16.1__).
        - I then review the history and key concepts of Gaia theory, developed by [[James Lovelock]] and Lynn Margulis. Rather than seeing the Earth as a dead planet, composed of rocks, oceans, and atmosphere, Gaia theory considers it as a complex system, in which the biosphere is tightly coupled to the Earth's inanimate parts in such a way that together they form a self-regulating, self-organizing system. I also emphasize that understanding how the Gaia system regulates the climate is very urgent today in view of the threats of climate change (__Section 8.3.3__).
        - My discussion of the conceptual framework of ecology focuses on the question: to what extent does this framework reflect the systems view of life? I review four basic systemic characteristics of life, introduced in Lectures 2 and 3, and I observe that ecologists, so far, have concentrated exclusively on the first two of these characteristics: on living systems as open systems, or dissipative structures, and on their nonlinear dynamics, including the phenomenon of emergence (__Section 16.2.1__).
        - Discussions of the other two characteristics (living systems as self-generating, autopoietic, systems, interacting cognitively with their environment in a way that is determined by their own internal organization) has been glaringly absent from the ecological literature. This contrasts sharply with the social sciences, where there have been lively discussions of autopoiesis and related ideas (__Section 16.2.2__).
        - At this point, therefore, the question of whether, and how exactly, the concept of autopoiesis applies to ecosystems, is still wide open. However, when we consider the planet as a whole, the Gaia system, the case for autopoiesis is very strong. The Gaia system is clearly self-generating.__ __The planetary metabolism converts inorganic substances into living organisms and, when they die, back into inorganic matter. All components of the Gaian network, including those of its atmospheric boundary, are produced by the system itself. According to Lynn Margulis, the concept of a planetary autopoietic network is justified because all life is embedded in a self-organizing web of bacteria, which continually regulates life on Earth (__Section 16.2.3__).
        - In the second part of the lecture, I turn to ecological sustainability. I briefly review the history of the idea and then propose an operational definition: “A sustainable human community must be designed in such a manner that its ways of life, its businesses, its economy, physical structures, technologies, and social institutions, __do not interfere with nature's inherent ability to sustain life__” (__Section 16.3.1__).
        - My operational definition  implies that the first step in this endeavor must be to understand how nature sustains life. In recent years, this understanding has become known as ecological literacy, or  "ecoliteracy." Being ecoliterate means understanding the basic principles of ecology and designing our communities accordingly. Of course, there are many differences between an ecosystem and a human community. But what we __can__ and must learn from ecosystems is how to live sustainably. This wisdom of nature is the very essence of ecoliteracy (__Section 16.3.2__).
        - In the coming decades the survival of humanity will literally depend on our ecological literacy — on our ability to understand the basic principles of ecology and to live accordingly. We need to teach our children, our students, and our corporate and political leaders, the fundamental facts of life — that one species' waste is another species' food; that matter cycles continually through the web of life;**  **that the energy driving these ecological cycles flows from the sun; that diversity assures resilience; and that life from its beginning more than three billion years ago did not take over the planet by combat but by networking, by cooperation, by partnerships (__Section 16.3.3__).
        - How to turn this basic ecological knowledge, which is also ancient wisdom, into action — in other words, the technological, social, and political implications of the systems view of life — is the subject of the last two lectures of the course.
    - Key takeaways
        - Ecology, principles of
            - The principles of organization that ecosystems have evolved to sustain the web of life; the basic concepts of ecology
        - Ecoliteracy (or ecological literacy)
            - The ability to understand the basic principles of ecology and to live accordingly
        - Sustainability, ecological
            - For a human community, the property of being designed in such a manner that its ways of life — businesses, economy, physical structures, and technologies — do not interfere with nature’s inherent ability to sustain life; see also: ecology, principles of
        - Ecosystem
            - A community of different species in a particular area, interacting with its abiotic (nonliving) and biotic (living) environment
        - Food web
            - In ecology, a community of organisms with food chains interlinked in a network pattern and with food cycles embedded in it
        - Biosphere
            - the global sum of all ecosystems on the planet; the entirety of regions occupied by life
        - Habitat
            - In ecology, the type of natural environment in which a particular species lives
        - Community, ecological
            - A network of different interacting species in a particular area
        - Gaia theory
            - A scientific theory describing the planet Earth as a whole as a living, self-regulating system
        - Biome
            - An ecosystem extending over a large area of millions of square kilometers
    - Supplementary Material
        - [How Wolves Change Rivers](https://youtu.be/ysa5OBhXz-Q)
            - This 5-minute video, narrated by George Monbiot, a leading environmental journalist and activist in the U.K., shows the interconnectedness of the web of life in a beautiful and most impressive way. It is one of the best tools for teaching systems thinking that I have come across.
        - The Story of Lakabe
            - [Medieval goat town becomes self sufficient eco village](https://youtu.be/91pBFyLWIx4)
            - This beautiful 13-minute video tells the amazing story about how a Spanish ghost town was turned into a self-sufficient ecovillage by a group of idealistic young people over a period of ten years. Narrated by Mauge Cañada, one of the early pioneers, this is a vivid testimony of the struggles and joys of these young urbanites who had no experience of country life, and who, over the years, “learned a lot about nature, about the land, and discovered sides of themselves they could not have discovered in any other way.” (Spanish with English subtitles)
- The Ecological Dimension of Life
    - So far in this course we've discussed the systems view of life in the biological, cognitive and social dimensions. In this lecture we now turn to the ecological dimension and ecological sustainability
    - We could have and perhaps should have started the course with the ecological dimension, since it's well know that no organism can exist in isolation. Animals need the photosynthesis of plants for their energy needs, plants depend on the carbon dioxide they produce by their breathing and the nitrogen fixation that occurs at their roots by various microorganisims.
    - Together plants, animals and micro organisms regulate the entire biosphere and maintain the conditions condusive for life - which is the basic premise for the so called Gaia theory (discussed in this lecture). 
    - We will hear then that the evolution of life from the very beginning, from the first colony of bacteria, went hand in hand with the planetary biosphere. From an inorganic surface to an organic living biosphere.
    - So we could have began the course with the ecological dimension, but on the other hand ecology is a relatively new science compared to the traditional disciplines of psychology, biology and sociology discussed before, hence the decision to introduce ecology in the historical context in which the corresponding disciplines developed
    - Lets now talk about the science of ecology - which arose from the greek word Oikos meaning household. So ecology is the scientific study of the earth household, or more precisely the relationships between the various relationship among the various members of the earth household. The plants, animals and microorganisms, and the study of their relationships with the natural environment both living and non-living
    - The basic ecological unit is the ecosystem, defined as a community of different species in a particular region. This community of species interacts with its nonliving or "**abiotic**" environment (the atmosphere, sunlight, water and so on), and with its living or "biotic" environment which is the other members of its environment. 
    - **The ecosystem in short consists of a biotic community interacting with its physical environment.**
    - Its evident form these definitions that the science of ecology is inherently multidisciplinary because ecosystems interlink the living with the nonliving world. So ecology must be grounded not only in biology and evolutionary theory but also in geology, atmospheric chemistry, thermodynamics and many other disciplines. And this is ecology without humans. 
    - When we study us humans beings in an ecological context we have to add a bunch of other fields; agriculture, technology, industrial design, political science and so on - so its inherently multidisciplinary.
    - Now the importance of studying within this general framework, the pervasive influence of human activities on the ecosystems of the earth and then conversely the reciprocal effect of our actions as they come back to us and effect us and our health/wellbeing... all this is now becoming ever more important and is highly relevant to assessing and hopefully influencing our fate as humanity. 
    - One of the great challenges of our time, as already mentioned, is to build and nurture sustainable communities, and to do this we can learn many lessons from ecosystems (because ecosystems are communities that have sustained themselves for billions of years)
    - The inherently multi disciplinary nature of ecology suggests that the systems view of life (also multidisciplinary) might be an ideal framework and language for the study of ecology. 
    - As mentioned in previous lectures the development of ecology and systems thinking went hand in hand in the 23's/30's. Ecology originated in the naturalist tradition of the late19th century and its first key concepts were refined in the 20/30's in this series of interdisciplinary dialogues that I've mentioned involving biologists, psychologists and ecologists.
    - You may ask why psychologists, which is an interesting point... because at the time there was a group of psychologists or school of psychology that was studying perception who discovered that we perceive in terms of irreducible perceptual patterns. And this took place in Germany/Austria - and they called these patterns Gestalt which is the German word for "organic form". So they saw perceptual patterns as Gestalts as organic forms irreducible, and the whole school became known Gestalt psychology.
    - Biologists found wholeness in individual organisms, psychologists in perceptual patterns and ecologists in ecological communities - and the interplay between these three diciplines were very fruitful.
    - The concepts that were explored in these foundational years of ecology were:
        - Biosphere
        - Ecosystem
        - Natural enviroment
        - Ecological community
        - Habitat of a species
    - All these terms originated were used for the first time in the 1920/30's and so those were the foundational concepts.
    - From the beginning of ecology, ecological communities were conceived of networks of organisms interlined through feeding relations. 
    - This idea led not only to the concepts of food chains and food cycles later then expanded to the contemporary concept of the food web, but it led to the momentous recognition that the network is the basic pattern of organisation of all living systems.
    - So ecology brought two key concepts to systems thinking, the network and the community.
    - When the English Zoooligist [[Charles Elton]] introduced the concepts of Food chains and food cycles in his pioneering book [[Animal Ecology]], he brought a dynamic perspective into ecology that would become the principal theoretical framework for succeeding generations of ecologists - the flow of energy and matter from one organism to the other. 
    - In addition to this dynamics of ecological cycles and flows, ecologists from the very beginning also **studied the developmental stages of an ecosystem as a whole as it passes through various stages - know as ecological secession.** 
        - Typically an ecological community goes through a phase of rapid growth when it settles in a particular area - and this is known as a **pioneer ecosystem**
        - Its characterised by rapid expansion and colonisation of the terrain, this rapid growth is followed by slower growth and development of increasing complexity until the community becomes stable and self perpetuating when it is called a **climax community**. 
    - In the 1950s the American Ecologist [[Eugene Odum]] wrote the first ecology textbook called [[Fundamentals of Ecology]] in which the basic principals and concepts of ecology were laid out in great clarity for the first time. This became a key textbook for generations of ecologists
    - In addition to the lucid and detailed discussion of fundemental ecological concepts, Odum also provided an overview over the main branches of ecology according to the habitats that were studied; those were fresh water ecology, marine ecology, and terrestrial ecology.
    - Odums textbook was co authored in part with his brother [[Howard Odum]], and together they published several studies of ecosystems in which they documented flows of energy and matter through the ecosystem in terms of a series of flow diagrams, that have since become known as **Odum Flow Diagrams,** which are part of a basic set of tools for ecologists today.
    - What are examples of ecosystems? Well they come in all sizes; they may be as small as a rotten log or they can be a forrest, meadow or as large as an ocean. A basic principal of ecology is the recognition that ecosystems like all living systems exist within one another, they are a nested structure of systems within systems or networks within networks
    - At the largest level, we have regional communities of plants and animals that may extend over millions of square km, and those very large ecosystems are known as biomes - examples of such being Tropical and temperate forests, savannah, tundras and deserts as some of the main biomes. 
    - Finally the largest ecological unit is the biosphere itself, the global sum of all ecosystems which is the focus of the celebrated Gaia theory by [[James Lovelock]] and [[Lynn Margulis]].
    - During the 1960's while [[Ilya Prigogine]] realised a crucial link between non equilibria systems and non-linearity, and while [[Humberto Maturana]], puzzled over the organisation of living systems the atmospheric chemist [[James Lovelock]] had an illuminating insight that introduced another radical change in our conception of life; the idea that the planet earth as a whole is a living self organising, self regulating system
    - The origins of lovelocks daring hypothesis lie in the early days of the NASA space program. While the idea of earth as a living organism in an ancient idea and Gaia itself is the name of the Greek earth Godess. And speculative theories about the planet as a living system had been advanced again and again throughout the ages, the spaceflights in the 60's enabled human beings to actually see the planet from the outside and many claimed that it was a profound spiritual experience for them that forever changed their relationship to the earth. 
    - The photos brought back from these flights became the most powerful symbol for the global ecology movement.
    - At that time NASA asked [[James Lovelock]] who was an atmospheric chemist and inventor (machines and instruments etc) to help them design a machine for a detection of life on Mars 
    - Lovelock contemplated the problem in how do you detect life, or recognise life; infact, what is life? and he came to the conclusion that the fact that alll living beings take in matter and energy and discard waste products - in other words metabolism - is the most general characheristic of life he could identify
    - So he assumed that life on any planet would use the atmosphere and oceans of that planet as a reservoir for the materials of life and the waste products, so he speculated that if one could analyse the atmosphere of the planet and find out if it was alive or not. And this is indeed the case
    - The terrestrial atmosphere contains gasses like oxygen and methane, which are very likely to react with each other, so there are lots of chemical reactions in the atmosphere between oxygen and methane that produce other products, and yet there are very large amounts of oxygen and methane that are present in the atmosphere. So Lovelock realised that this special state is due to the presence of life on earth, life which continually refill the reservoir of oxygen and methane. 
    - We know that plants produce oxygen constantly and other organisms produce other gasses so that the atmosphere is continually replenished with these gasses, in other words it exists in a state that exists far from chemical equilibrium!
    - [[James Lovelock]] therefore recognised the earths atmosphere as an open system far from equilibrium characterised by a constant flow of energy and matter, exactly the kind of characteristic that [[Ilya Prigogine]] identified as characteristic of life around the same time in the 1960's
    - The process of self regulation is essential to Lovelocks idea, he knew from astro physics that the heat of the sun had increase by about 25% since the beginning of life on earth, yet the temperature on earth has remained comfortable for life at a relatively constant value for those 4 billion years.
    - So what if the earth were able to self regulate its temperature Lovelock asked? Just as we humans beings regulate our body temperature so it remains stable. So what if the earth were also able to self-regulate the salinity of its oceans and so on
    - Lovelock realised that this hypothesis amounted to a radical break with conventional science... rather than seeing the earth as an inanimate dead planet as geologists used to do, seeing it as being composed as inanimate rocks, oceans and atmosphere - he proposed to consider it as a complex system in which the living part (biosphere) is tightly coupled to the earths oceans, rocks and atmosphere so that together the living and non living part form a self regulating, self organising system - which is the key to the Gaia hypothersis
    - He didnt know anything about how these gasses were being produced, but then he met [[Lynn Margulis]] - a very fortunate encounter in the history of science. She said once that "he had all these questions and I had all the answers" because she was a microbiologist that knew exactly where methane was produced, in which bacterias and at which rates and all about cycles of gasses and so on. Together they identified a complex network of feedback loops which bring about the self regulation of the planetary system, and in doing so they turned the original Gaia hypothesis into a full fledged Gaia theory
    - As mentioned the outstanding feature of this Gaia theory (of these feedback loops) is that they link together living and non living systems. Gaia theory shows that theres is a tight interlocking between the living parts of the planet (plants, organisms, micro organisms, animals) and its non living parts (rocks, water, atmosphere).
    - The feedback cycles interlinking the living and nonliving part of the planet regulate and balance the various conditions in the atmospheres and oceans and in particular they regulate the climate. And this of course becomes crucial today with the threats of climate change, the understanding of how the Gaia system regulates the climate is not only intellectually interesting but becomes very urgent and becomes important as we shall discuss later
    - Lets return to the conceptual framework of ecology and lets see to what extent this framework of ecology actually reflects the systems view of life. To do so lets review four basic systemic characteristics of life that were introduce in L2/3 so as to determine if ecosystems actually satisfy those characteristics
    - The four systemic characteristics of life
        - A living system is materially and energetically open, it is a dissipative structure far from equilibrium and theres a continual flow of energy and matter through the system
        - The dynamics of this open system are non-linear and have the potential for new order at critical points of instability
        - A living system is a self generating autopoietic network in which each component helps to transform or replace other components, including that of the networks boundary
        - This network interacts cognitively with the environment, in a way that is determined by its own internal organisation.  
    - When we look at the ecological literature we can easily see that ecologists so far have concentrated exclusively on the first two of these characteristics; the open system and non-linear dynamics with emergence.
    - Ever since the pioneering studies of [[Howard Odum]], the flows of energy and matter through the ecosystem has been the principal approach to ecology. Ecosystems are studied within the framework of thermodynamics, in terms of nutrient pools, fluxes, food chains, food webs, decomposition, nutrient cycling - all key terms in ecological text books, and they all refer to the first and second critereum
    - The non-linear nature of all ecosystems was appreciated very early on with the recognition of the food web and the basic pattern of organisation, and networks are of course non-linear. And therefore systems ecologists soon began to pay attention to the phenomena of self organisation.
    - And then with the advent of complexity theory in the 1980's ecosystems we understood dissipative structures far from equilibrium. However this concept is much more challenging than other concepts due to its complexity and mathematical sophistication and you have to look for a long time to find the discussion of dissipative structures in ecological textbooks but its there.
    - Ecologists have begun recently to use the concept of non-linear dynamics, dissipative structures and emergence and so on in their analysis of ecosystems.
    - So both of the first two characteristics of biological life have been applied successfully for the studies of ecosystem structures and processes, unfortunately the same can not be said about the other two characteristics relating to autopoiesis.
    - In fact there is a glaring absence of any discussion of autopoiesis in the ecological litrature; it may well be that the pathways and processes in ecological networks are not sufficiently know to decide if an ecosystem is autopoietic or not, but it would certainly be interesting to discuss this with ecologists as it was so to discuss it with biologists and sociologists to discuss the concept of autopoiesis in social theory, so far this has not happened!
    - **Therefore the question of wether and how exactly the concept autopoiesis applies to ecosystems is wide open **
    - Now when we shift our perspective from ecosystems to the planet as whole, to the whole Gaia system we find a global network of processes and transformation, which has been described in considerable detail in Gaia theory. In fact there seems to be more evidence for the autopoietic nature of the planet than for ecosystems. 
    - According to Gaia theory the earths atmosphere is created, transformed and maintained by the biospheres metabolic processes. Were talking here about a network of bacteria that influences the rates of chemical reactions in the atmosphere in the soils in the ground, and in a sense you could say that bacteria are a biological equivalent of enzymes in the chemical realm because they influence the rate of chemical processes and facillitate chemical processes. 
    - The Gaia system is clearly self generating, the planetary metabolism converts inorganic substances into living organisms and when they die, back into the soils, oceans and atmospheres. 
    - All components of the Gaia network, including those of its atmospheric boundary are produced by the Gaia system itself - so those are all the conditions for autopoiesis and it seems that the case for Gaia being an autopoietic network is very strong. 
    - Indeed this was the view of [[Lynn Margulis]], the coauthor of the Gaia theory,  according to her the concept of a planetary autopoietic network is justified because all life is embedded in a self organising web of bacteria involving elaborate networks of sensory and control systems. Myriads of bacteria living in the soil, rocks and ocean, as well as inside us (all plants, animals and humans) continually regulate life on earth. 
    - Since the systems view of life defines these self organising processes as cognitive processes, we need to consider the microbial web of life as a cognitive systems. And in view of all these facts [[Lynn Margulis]] stated confidently that "there is little doubt that the planetary patinea... is autopoietic".
    - After this first historical and theoretical part, lets now turn to ecological sustainability; the concept of sustainability as you may know was introduced in the early 1980s by [[Lester Brown]] the founder of the [[World Watch Institute]], who defined a sustainable society as "one that is able to satisfy its needs without diminishing the chances of future generations".
    - Around the same time the report of the [[World Commission on Environment and Development]], known also as the [[Brundtland Report]], used the same definition to present the notion of sustainable development. 
    - "Humankind has the ability to achive sustainable development - to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs"
    - Now these definitions of sustainability in my view are important moral exhortations, they remind us of our responsibility to pass on to our children and future generations a world with as many opportunities as the one we inherited ourselves!
    - These definitions of sustainability, do not tell us anything about how to build a sustainable society, and this is why there has been so much confusion around the meaning of sustainability - even within the environmental movement! So what we need in my view is an operational definition of sustainability. Its also worth mentioning here that the junction of sustainable development as terms is also quite problematic. (see: Holling_Complexity-EconEcol-SocialSys_2001)
    - The key to an operational definition of sustainability, is the realisation that we do not need to invent sustainable human communities from zero. We can learn valuable lessons from ecosystems, we can actually model our human communities after ecosystems - which are sustainable communities of plants animals and microorganisms. They have sustained life for billions of years.
    - So we can say that **"a sustainable human community must be designed in such a manner that its ways of life, businesses, economy, physical structures, technologies, social institutions and so on, do not interfere with natures inherent ability to sustain life."** That is my operational definition of sustainability. 
    - Sustainable communities evolve their patterns of living over time, in continual interaction with other living systems, both human and non human. So sustainability doesn't mean that things do not change - its not sustaining the status quo - its a dynamic process of coevolution rather than a static state
    - Now this operational definition to design a human community in such a way that it doesn't interfere with natures inherent ability to sustain life. This implies that the first step in this endeavour, must be to understand how nature sustains life. 
    - In recent years this understanding has become known as ecological literacy or ecoliteracy for short; being ecoliterate means understanding the basic principals of ecology and designing our communities appropriately.
    - The systems view of life provides an appropriate framework for the conceptual link between ecological and human communities. Both are living systems exhibiting similar principals of organisation, of course with many differences. Theres no self awareness in ecosystems, no language, no consciousness, no culture, and therefore no justice, no democracy but also no greed and no dishonesty.
    - So we cannot learn anything about our human qualities and our human short comings from the study of ecosystems, but what we can and must learn from them is how to live sustainably and this wisdom of nature is the very essence of ecoliteracy. 
    - In the coming decades the survival of humanity will literally depend on our ecoliteracy based on the principals of ecology and to live accordingly. This means that ecoliteracy must become a critical skill for politicians, business leaders and professionals in all spheres, and therefore should be the most important part of education at all levels - from primary to secondary to higher education and the continuing training and professional development.
    - We need to teach our children, students and corporate and political leaders that basic facts of life:
        - One species waste is anothers food
        - Matter cycles continually through the web of life
        - Solar energy drives ecological cycles
        - Diversity assures resilience
        - Life did not take of the planet by combat but by networking
    - This basic ecological knowledge which is also ancient wisdom, is now being taught increasingly in schools, universities and various centres of learning.
    - At the Centre for Ecoliteracy in Berkley California (www.ecoliteracy.org) which I founded with friends and colleagues, we have developed a special pedagogy for teaching ecoliteracy in primary and secondary schools. We call it education for sustainable living. It is a pedagogy to teach the basic principals of ecology and the skills to build and nurture sustainable communities. 
    - Since its inception about 20 years ago the centre for ecoliteracy has worked with schools in hundreds of cities on six continents to implement this pedagogy. We do not work in higher education, we concentrate our efforts on primary and secondary schools - however there is a corresponding organisation in Boston called Second Nature (secondnature.org), and they promote ecoliteracy at the university level. 
    - For more than 20 years they have worked with more than 500 colleges and universities to help make the principals of sustainabilit fundamental to every aspect of higher eduation.
    - Second nature have launched a national movement in the united states, know as education for sustainability known as EFS. And they maintain EFS networks at the state, regional and national levels.
