---
Tags: [Course]
---

# Capra Course L11

- [Link]
    - Summary
        - In this lecture, I give a systemic analysis of the major problems of our time. To begin with, I point out that these problems — energy, environment, climate change, poverty, inequality, and so on —are all systemic problems, interconnected and interdependent, and require corresponding systemic solutions. I conclude that the fundamental dilemma underlying all these problems is the illusion that unlimited economic growth is possible on a finite planet (__Section 17.1__).
        - Economic and corporate growth are the driving forces of global [[Capitalism]], which promotes excessive consumption and a throw-away economy that generates waste and pollution and depletes natural resources. All that is exacerbated by global climate change, caused by our energy-intensive and fossil-fuel-based technologies.
        - It seems that our key challenge is to shift from an economic system based on perpetual economic growth to one that is both ecologically sustainable and socially just.
        - Growth is a central characteristic of all life, but growth in nature is not linear, nor unlimited. While certain parts of an organism, or an ecosystem, grow, others decline and eventually disintegrate, releasing their components for new growth. This balanced, multi-dimensional growth is well known to biologists and ecologists. I call it "qualitative growth"  to contrast it with the quantitative growth, measured in terms of the undifferentiated index of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), used by most economists. Qualitative growth is growth that enhances the quality of life through generation and regeneration, and it includes an increase in complexity, sophistication, and maturity (__Section 17.2__).
        - This focus on qualitative growth is fully consistent with the systems view of life, which is essentially a science of qualities, as I mentioned in my introductory lecture. What we need in order to assess the health of an economy are qualitative indicators of poverty, literacy, health, equity, the environment, and so on, none of which can be reduced to money-coefficients and aggregated into a single number.
        - Qualifying growth means distinguishing between "good" growth and "bad" growth, and then enhancing the good growth and decreasing, or eliminating, the bad growth. From an ecological perspective, the distinction between good and bad growth is easy. Bad growth is growth of production processes and services that externalize social and environmental costs, are based on fossil fuels, involve toxic substances, deplete natural resources, and degrade ecosystems. Good growth is growth of more efficient production processes and services that involve renewable energies, zero emissions, continual recycling of natural resources, and restoration of the Earth's ecosystems.
        - In the second part of the lecture I discuss two of the most severe harmful consequences of undifferentiated economic growth, and specifically of economic globalization: economic inequality and climate change. The rise of global [[[[Capitalism]]]] has been accompanied by rising social inequality and polarization. The gap between the rich and the poor has grown, both between countries and within individual countries.
        - Within individual countries, by far the highest level of inequality of all advanced industrial countries is in the United States. As economist [[Joseph Stiglitz]] documents in great detail in his eye-opening book __[[The Price of Inequality]]__, these rapidly increasing inequalities were brought about not only by the rise of global [[[[Capitalism]]]], but also, and perhaps even more, by specific government policies, such as tax cuts and other favorable economic conditions for the rich at the expense of social services for the poor. The result has been a systematic transfer of wealth from the poor to the rich during several recent American administrations (__Section 17.3.4__).
        - Turning to climate change, I review the basic findings of climate science: the link between greenhouse gas emissions and global warming, leading to excessive energy and moisture in the atmosphere, which can cause a wide variety of extreme climate events. I emphasize the need to reduce greenhouse gases to the safe level of 350 ppm, and I discuss the two requirements derived from it: to cut global CO2 emissions by 80% by 2020, and to keep 80% of proven fossil fuel reserves in the ground (__Section 17.3.5__).
        - I conclude the lecture by stating again that global [[Capitalism]] needs to be fundamentally redesigned, and I review the activities of the new global civil society, or global justice movement, which attempts to fundamentally “change the game” (__Section 17.4__). Most of the research institutes of the global civil society are communities of scholars and activists who are engaged in a wide variety of projects and campaigns that offer systemic solutions to the world's problems. Today, hundreds of such systemic solutions are being developed all over the world to solve problems of the economy, environmental degradation, energy, climate change, food security, and so on (__Section 17.5__). The most far-reaching and most promising of these solutions are highlighted in the last lecture of the course.
    - Key takeaways
        - Problem, systemic
            - A problem that needs to be understood and solved within the context of other problems, all interconnected and interdependent
        - Economic Inequality
        - Ecological Impact (Climate Change)
            - From Chapter 17 and Lester Brown, [[Plan B]] 4.0.
        - Quantity
            - Property of a system that can be measured and is exhibited by the system’s parts, the total property being equal to the sum of the properties of the parts
        - Quality
            - Property of a complex system that none of its parts exhibit, which cannot be measured but can be mapped; see also: emergent property
        - Growth, quantitative
            - In conventional economics, a type of undifferentiated and unlimited growth of the gross domestic product (GDP), pursued by promoting excessive consumption and a throw-away economy that is energy and resource intensive, generating waste and pollution, and depleting the Earth’s natural resources
        - Growth, qualitative
            - In ecology, a type of balanced, multi-faceted growth in which certain parts of organisms or ecosystems grow, while others decline, releasing and recycling their components which become resources for new growth; growth that enhances the quality of life through generation and regeneration, and which includes an increase of complexity, sophistication, and maturity
        - Civil society, global
            - A global network of non-government organizations (NGOs), which are effective political actors independent of traditional national or international institutions
    - Supplementary Material
        - [The story of stuff](https://youtu.be/9GorqroigqM)
            - A very imaginative and hugely successful video about excessive consumption by Californian activist Annie Leonard, who skillfully maps the systemic links among a host of environmental and social problems.
- Systems Thinking and the State of the World
    - Previous lecture
        - The great challange of our time is to build and nurture sustainable communities, designed in such a way that our activities do not interfear with natures inherent ability to sustain life.
        - The first step in this endeavour is to understand how nature sustains life, which I've called being ecologically literate; understanding the basic principals of ecology and organisation that ecosystems have evolved to sustain the web of life.
    - This lecture
        - Once we've become ecologically literate, once we understand the processes and patterns of organisation and relationships that enable nature to sustain life, we will also understand the ways that humanity - especially since the industrial revolution - has interfered with those patterns, and we will realise that those interferences are a major course of the problemes we are having today.
    - When we look at the state of the world today, one thing we notice immediately is that the major problems of our time - energy, environment, climate change, poverty, inequality, economics and so on - cannot be understood in isolation. 
    - They are systemic problems that are all interconnected and interdependent which require appropriate systemic solutions. You may remember that we began this course with this observation.
    - One of the most detailed documentations of the interconnectedness of global problems is the recent book "[[Plan B]]" by [[Lester Brown]], who is the founder of the [[World Watch Institute]] and one of the most Authoritative environmental thinkers.
    - In this book he demonstrates with impeccable clarity, how the vicious cycle of demographic pressure and poverty leads to the depletion of resources
        - Falling water tables
        - Shrinking forests
        - Collasing fisheries
        - Eroding soils
        - Grassland turning into desert
        - And so on
    - How this resource depletion, exacerbated by climate change, produces so called "failing states" -  that is states which can no longer guarantee the security and wellbeing of their citizens - some of whom in shear desperation turn to terrorisim.
    - So we see how these problems are all interconnected, and in my view the fundamental dilemma underlying all these problems is the illusion that unlimited economic growth is possible on a finite planet. 
    - It should be obvious that projecting out linearly to grow grow grow with consumption of evermore materials is not possible on a finite planet, and yet this illusion is sustained by most of our economists and politicians. 
    - It amounts to a clash between linear thinking and the nonlinear processes of the biosphere - feedback cycles and various relationship that constitute the web of life. Through these feedback loops the planet balances and regulates itself, as we learned in the last lecture from Gaia theory, our economies by contrast are fuelled by materialism and greed - which seems to be limitless
    - This economic and also corporate growth are the driving forces of [[Capitalism]], now the dominant economic system in the world, which at its cener has a network of financial flows - a network that was designed with free trade rules and was designed specifically without any ethics! Theres no ethical principals in global [[Capitalism]].
    - So when ever theres a decision to be made to invest in a way that will make you more money or in a way that will protect human rights, heath, democracy, environment or any other human values -  the decision is always to invest in making more money at the expense of these other values, which is programmed into the computers of the global economy.
    - So as a consequence, inequality and social exclusion has become an inherent feature of global [[Capitalism]], widenting the gap between rich and poor and increasing world poverty
    - And in this economic system, perpetual growth is pursued relentlessly by promoting excessive consumption, advertising, a throw away economy that creates waste and pollution while depleting natural resources... and all these problems are exacerbated by climate change, caused by our energy intensive and fossil fuel based technologies!
    - So given this analysis, it seems that our key challenge is how to shift from an economic system based on perpetual economic growth to one that is both economically sustainable and socially just.
    - Some people believe we should shift from growth to no growth or even negative growth, but I believe this is not a solution because growth is a central characteristic of all life. So a society, enterprise or economy that does not grow, will sooner or later perish
    - **However growth in nature is not linear, nor is it unlimited. While certain parts of an organism or ecosystem grow, others decline or disintegrate and liberate the resources that were tied up in those structures and the resources serve new growth**
    - In nature we observe a balance and multi dimensional growth, well know to biologists and ecologists; we can call this **Qualitative growth** to contrast it with the quantitive growth measured in the undifferentiated GDP, which just counts everything that makes money and adds it up indiscriminately.
    - In fact, most of whats called growth today is waste - and so we largely have an economics of waste and destruction.** In contrast Qualitative growth, is growth that enhances the quality of life through generation and regeneration.**
    - **In living organisms, ecosystems and societies, Qualitative growth is growth that includes an increase of complexity, sophistication and maturity**
    - This focus on qualitative growth is fully consistent with the systems view of life which is essentially a science of qualities - which was previously mentioned.
    - Let's say more about quantities vs qualities; quantities like mass or energy give us information about the parts of a system, and when you want to know more about the quantity about the whole - e.g. the total mass or energy - all you have to do is add up the quantity of the parts and the sum is the whole.
    - **Qualities are something very different, qualities of a complex system are properties that none of the parts exhibit.** For example a quality like health cannot be assessed by just adding up the health of the parts; my health is not the sum total of my fingers, toes, kidneys and teeth.
    - **Qualities arise from patterns and processes of relationships among the parts**. Applying this to economics, this means that we cannot understand the nature of complex systems like social systems, ecosystems, or economic systems by just describing them in purely quantitive terms.
        - **Quantities can be measured**
        - **Qualities need to be mapped**
    - So what we need in order to asses the state of economy - the health of an economy - are qualitative indicators; of poverty, literacy, health, equity, the environment, and so on - none of these indicators can be reduced to money coefficients and aggregated into a single number
    - And indeed several indicators of this kind have been proposed in recent years and a good place to find more information about this is a website called "Beyond GDD" at Beyond-GDP.eu
    - These considerations also apply to the concept of development, which is related to the concept of growth, and like growth development is used today in two quite different senses. One qualitative and one quantitive
    - For biologists, development is a fundamental property of life.  All living systems develop and life constantly reaches out to create novelty! (as discussed in evoloution lecture)
    - **So the biological concept of development implies a sense of a multifaceted unfolding of living organisms, ecosystems and communities reaching their potential.** Most economists by contrast restrict the term development to a single economic dimension, usually measured in per capita GDP.
    - So the huge diversity of human existence is compressed into this linear quantitate concept associated with monetary coefficients. Economists recognise only money and cashflows, ignoring all other forms of fundamental wealth; all ecological, social and cultural assets.
    - Now it appears that this linear view of development as used by economists and politicians, corresponds to the narrow concept of quantitive growth, while the biological conception corresponds to qualitative growth
    - In fact the biological conception of growth corresponds to both the qualitative and quantitive growth - think of a developing organism; a young child grows by expanding rather rapidly and so does an ecosystem - and then after this early phase, there comes a phase of slower growth, of maturation and ultimately of decline and of disintegration. Or in ecosystems in terms of secessions into a different form of the ecosystem.  
    - So as living systems mature, their growth processes shift from quantitive to qualitative growth. This distinction also sheds some light on the widely used concept of sustainable development which I've always found rather problematic... 
    - **Sustainable development**
        - If "development" is used in the current narrow economic sense associated with the notion of unlimited quantitive growth, such economic development can never be sustainable!
        - Thus becoming an oxymoron
        - If development is understood as more than just an economic process including social, economical and spiritual dimensions - then indeed such development can be sustainable!
    - Let's now see how the concept of qualitative growth can help resolve our economic crisis. 
    - Instead of assessing the state of the economy by the crude quantitive economic indicator of GDP we need to distinguish between good growth and bad growth; we need to qualify growth and then enhance the good growth while decreasing or eliminating the bad growth. 
    - From an ecological point of vie this distinction between good growth and bad growth is rather easy; 
        - **Bad growth**
            - Externalises social and environmental costs (doesn't take them into account)
            - Are based on fossil fuels
            - Involve toxic substances 
            - Depletes natural resources
            - Degrades earths ecosystems
        - **Good growth**
            - Growth of more efficient production processes, and services that involve:
            - Renewable energies
            - Zero emissions
            - Continual recycling of natural resources
            - Restoration of the earths ecosystems
    - So what we need to do then is construct our economic measures and political measures like taxations and subsidies to enhance the good growth reduce the bad growth
    - Such attempts at qualifying growth is now being carried out in Europe by a rather large coalition of government and non government organisations, and this coalition is the one mentioned before called **Beyond GDP**
    - Lets now turn to the social and ecological consequences of unrestricted and undifferentiated economic growth; specifically to economic globalisation.
    - Over the last 3 decades the social impacts of economic globalisation has been studied rather extensively by scholars and community leaders, and their analysis shows that the new global economy is producing a multitude of interconnected harmful consequences; rising social inequality, and social exclusion, a breakdown of democracy, rapid and extensive deterioration of our natural environment and increasing poverty and alienation.
    - The new global [[Capitalism]] has threatened and destroyed local communities around the world and with the pursuit of an ill conceived biotechnology it has invaded the very sanctity of life by trying to turn biodiversity into a monoculture and ecology into engineering and life itself into a commodity.
    - As mentioned, all these consequences are interdependent and interconnected. Lets now concentrate on just two of them - one in the social realm and one in the environmental realm; economic inequality and climate change
        - **Economic inequality**
            - The new global economy has profoundly transformed the social relationships between capital and labour.
            - Economic [[Power]] today resides in global financial networks, where as labout is still local, operating in the real material world. Since the global economic [[Power]] determines the fate of most local jobs, labour has become fragmented and disempowered. Many workers today, union workers will not, will not fight for higher wages and better working conditions for fear of having their jobs exported to a foreign country, moved abroad
            - Because of this fragmentation of labour and the gradual dismantling of the welfare state under the pressures of economic globalisation. The rise of global [[Capitalism]] has been accompanied by social inequality and polarisation. The gap between rich and poor has grown both within countries, and between individual countries.
            - Within individual countries, by far the highest level of inequality is within the united states. As Economist [[Joseph Stiglitz]] pints out in great detail in his eye opening book [[The Price of Inequality]]; America has been growing apart at an increasingly rapid rate during the last three decades. These rapidly increasing inequalities were brought about not only by the rise of global [[Capitalism]], but also and perhaps even more by specific government policies -such as tax cuts and other favourable economic conditions for the rich, at the expense of services for the poor such as investment in education, in infrastructure and so on. The result has been a systematic transfer of money and wealth from the poor to the rich, and this has gone on through several of the past administrations in the states. 
            - [[Joseph Stiglitz]] explains that there are two ways to become wealthy; you can either create wealth or you can take wealth away from others. He documents that in the states, much of the wealth at the top stems from wealth transfer rather than wealth creation. This growing economic inequality, is accompanied by a growing imbalance of political [[Power]] as the super rich have increasingly taken over the American political process. 
            - In a vicious cycle (or self amplifying feedback loop), between politics and economics; super rich donors and big lobbyists finance all the important electoral campaigns and in exchange they receive favourable policies that further increase their wealth, which they use to further increase their campaign contributions to get more contributions and so on; and this vicious cycle continues. 
        - No lets turn to the environmental crisis, among all the environmental problems engendered by global [[Capitalism]], climate change is by far the most dangerous and threatening for life on our planet as we know. The economic and political dynamics creating climate change are the same as the ones creating the inequality
        - Vast short term profits in the fossil fuel industry at the expense of increasing threats to the well being and survival of millions of victims of climate catastrophes around the world. Climate science is now a well established science of several decades and its findings are unequivocal.
        - Summarised
            - When sunlight warms the surface of the earth a large proportion of the reflected thermal radiation is absorbed by greenhouse gasses in the atmosphere.
            - In the early history of the planet, this greenhouse effect created the protective envelope that allowed life to evolve and flourish, while the giant feedback loops of the Gaia system maintained the earths atmosphere in a stable range conducive for life.
            - Since the industrial evolution however, human activity has generated excessive greenhouse gas emissions and therefore excessive amounts of heat has been trapped by the greenhouse effect resulting in the global warming of the earths atmosphere beyond safe levels. 
            - The principal sources of human induced greenhouse gasses are the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation, both emitting Co2 and the management of livestock where a lot of methane is emitted, which is an even more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.
            - Warmer air means that there is more energy and more moisture in the atmosphere and since the climate involves highly non-linear processes - ocean currents, winds, the effect of the topograph of the earth, mountain ranges, the artic and antartic - its a very complex non-linear system so there is a wide variety of consequences of the energy and moisture which can lead to floods, tornados, hurricanes, droughts, heatwaves, wildfires and so on.
            - One of the educational tasks we have is to explain to people the difference between weather and climate, so for example when they experience heavy snowfall as happens in Europe some people say "look theres no global warming because its cold and there is snow", which is confusing weather and climate.
            - The excess of energy an moisture gives rise to an excess of weather conditions of many many varieties, and indeed in recent years we have seen a series of climate catastrophes which are consistent with the predictive effect of global warming. 
            - Exact predictions are very difficult but the following facts have been established:
                - **Co2 in the atmosphere has now passed 400ppm and climate scientists have agree that the safe level to avoid climate catastrophe is 350ppm**
                    - 417ppm in 2020
                - To reduce the greenhouse gasses to 350ppm means cutting global Co2 emissions by 80% by 2020
                - The other important number to remember is the safe absolute amount of Co2 that we can emit into the atmosphere and still stay at a safe level. Thats a very large number; 565 gigatons (billions of tons) of Co2... but the important fact to remember is that this number represents only 20% of the reserves that the proven reserves that the fossil fuel company have in the ground and listed as assets that they plan to burn!
                - **So this means that to avoid global climate collapse the fossil fuel companies need to keep 80% of their assets (proven reserves) in the ground. **
                - This explains why big oil and big coal fight so hard against restrictions on carbon emissions, even to the extent of systematically denying climate science and orchestrating publicity campaigns against climate science and undermining it, because they don't want to turn to 80% of their assets into whats called **"stranded assets"**
                - **Once the financial markets know that 80% of these assets will stay in the ground, they're not worth anything - so the shares drop by 80%, which for them is a catastrophe of course!**
                - One of the most eloquent writers on climate change is [[Bill McKibben]] and in the systems view of life book we cite numerous articles of his - and he writes **"you can have a healthy fossil-fuel balance sheet, or a relatively healthy planet - but now that we know the numbers it looks like you cant have both."**
                - Now to conclude the lecture lets me state again that **it has now become increasingly clear that global [[Capitalism]] in its present form unsustainable, socially, ecologically and even financially! It needs to be fundamentally redesigned**
                - Indeed scholars, community leaders and activists around the world are raising their voices and demanding that we must change the game - and suggesting concrete ways of doing so. 
                - Any realistic discussion on how to change the game must begin with the recognition that the current form of economic globalisation has been consciously designed and can therefore be redesigned - the so called global market is really just a network of machines / computers that are programmed with the fundamental principal that money making should take precedent over all other human values... but human values can change!
                - **Human values are not natural laws, and the same electronic networks of financial flows and information could be used with other values built into the system! ** 
                - The problem is not technology, it's human values and therefore politics. Indeed in the turn of the century, an impressive global coalition of non governmental organisations (NGOs) has emerged, formed around **human dignity and ecological sustainability**. 
                - This global coalition or global justice movement as its sometime called has organised a series of very powerful protests at various meetings of the WTO, G7, G8 etc. and has also held several world social forum meetings, most of which in Brazil.
                - At the these meetings the NGOs have proposed a whole set of alternative trade policies including concrete and radical proposals for restructuring the global financial institutions; the world bank, IMF and so on. This would profoundly change the nature of globalisation. In the systems view of life text book we discuss these proposals in some detail. 
                - This global justice movement is very interesting as it exemplifies a new type of political movement that is typical of our information age. Because of their skilful use of the internet these NGO's in the coalition are able to network with each other, share information and mobilise its members with incredibly unprecedented speed. 
                - As a result the new global NGOs have emerged as effective political actors who are independent of traditional national or international institutions. They constistute a new form of global civil society!
                - To place their political discourse within a systemic and ecological perspective the global civil society relies on a network of scholars, research institutes, think tanks and centers of learning that operate largely outside our leading academic institutions, business organisations or goverment agencies.
                - There are dozens of these institutions of research and learning in the world today; in the text book we list 40 of these representative organisations grouped into various categories from around the world.
                - Their common characteristic is that they pursue their research and teaching within an explicit framework of shared core values. Within this global civil society the systemic thinking is also the most advanced. 
                - If you think of three centres of [[Power]] in the world today; politics/goverment, business and civil society - the levels of sophistication in order of achievement is civil society, business and government last
                - Most of these research institutes of the global civil society are communities of scholars and activists, who are engaged in a wide variety of projects and campaigns that offer systemic solutions to the worlds problems.
                - Today hundreds of systemic solutions are being developed all over the world to solve problems of the economy, environmental degradation, energy, climate change, food security and so on. 
                - In the final lecture we will review some of the most promising and far reaching of these solutions. 
