---
Tags: [Course]
---

# Capra Course L8

- [Link](https://spring.capracourse.net/lessons/lecture-8-life-mind-society/)
    - Summary
        - In this lecture, I discuss how the systems view of life can be extended from its biological and cognitive dimensions to the social dimension. From an evolutionary perspective, it is very natural to ground the understanding of social phenomena in a unified conception of life and consciousness. In the lecture I show how our capability to form abstract mental images gives rise to fundamental social phenomena — values, conflicts of interest, and relationships of [[Power]]. (__Section 14.1__)
        - The extension of the systems view of life to the social domain is based on the assumption, supported by evolution, that there is a fundamental unity to life, that different living systems exhibit similar patterns of organization. In particular, the network is a fundamental pattern characteristic of all life. The concept of self-generating networks has been applied to the social domain by sociologist Niklas Luhmann in his theory of social autopoiesis. According to Luhmann, living networks in human society are networks of communications. Each communication generates thoughts, information, meaning, ideas; this triggers further communications, and so the entire network generates itself. (__Section 14.3.4__)
        - As communications continue in a social network, the form multiple feedback loops, and eventually a shared system of beliefs and of values emerges — a common context of meaning, known as culture; and thus the social network becomes a community. I discuss the origin of the term “culture” and its interesting dynamics, as culture emerges from a network of communications and then puts constraints on that network. (__Section 14.4.2__)
        - I conclude this discussion by juxtaposing  biological and social networks. Biological networks operate in the realm of matter, social networks in the realm of meaning. Both produce material structures, and social networks also produce the nonmaterial characteristics of culture. Biological systems exchange molecules in networks of chemical reactions; social systems exchange ideas and information in networks of communications. Biological networks produce a material boundary that imposes constraints in the chemistry inside it; social networks produce a cultural boundary that imposes constraints on the behavior of its members. (__Section 14.4.4__)
        - In the second part of the lecture I discuss one of the most striking characteristics of social reality: the phenomenon of [[Power]]. The essential role of [[Power]] in social organization is linked to conflicts of interest that inevitably arise. [[Power]] is the means by which these conflicts are resolved. This does not necessarily imply the threat or use of violence. In addition to the threat of sanctions, [[Power]] can be exercised by offering incentives or rewards, and by persuasion and education. The negative aspects of [[Power]] arise when [[Power]] is associated with the advancement of one's own interests rather than the advancements of the interest of the community, and even more so when [[Power]] is pursued for its own sake.
        - In complex societies, resolutions of conflicts and decisions about how to act will be effective only if authority and [[Power]] are organized within administrative structures. Thus, [[Power]] plays a central role in the emergence of social structures. In social theory, the term "social structure"  is defined as a pattern of social arrangements which are, essentially, rules of conduct, formal or informal. All formal structures, or social institutions, are ultimately rules of behavior. They facilitate decision-making and embody relationships of [[Power]].
        - I briefly discuss the role of [[Power]] in social networks, which is a recent development. According to sociologist [[Manuel Castells]], the paramount form of [[Power]] in our “network society“ is the [[Power]] to constitute networks, to connect individuals and institutions to these networks (or  to exclude them from the networks), and to interconnect different networks. I emphasize that [[Power]] in social networks is a different kind of [[Power]] — not [[Power]] as domination, but [[Power]] as empowerment. [[Power]] as domination is most effectively exerted through a hierarchy, whereas [[Power]] as empowerment is most effectively exerted in a network. (__Section 14.4.3__)
        - My extension of the systems view of life to the social domain explicitly includes the material world. This is unusual. Traditionally the natural sciences are supposed to deal with matter and the social sciences with social relationships and structures. In the future, this strict division will no longer be possible, because sustainable communities must be designed in such a way that neither their material nor their social structures interfere with nature's inherent ability to sustain life. To do so, a unified conceptual framework for the understanding of material and social structures will be essential.
    - Key Concepts
        - Social network
            - In social science, a network of communications among human individuals
        - Communication, systems view of
            - A mutual coordination of behavior between living organisms
        - Structure, social
            - In social theory, a set of rules of conduct, whether informal or formalized, documented, and enforced by law
        - Meaning
            - The human understanding, or experience, of context
        - Culture, systems view of
            - A shared set of beliefs, values, and rules of conduct (a common context of meaning) emerging in a social network from continuing communications
        - Social system
            - A community of individuals belonging to a single species; in social science, a social network; see also: autopoiesis, social
        - Community, human
            - A human social system sharing a common culture
        - Autopoiesis, social
            - The pattern of organization of a living social system: a self-generating network of communications within a cultural boundary of its own making
        - [[Power]], systems view of
            - (1) The submission of some to the will of others as a means of resolving in conflicts of interest, exerted most effectively in hierarchies; (2) the empowerment of others, exerted most effectively in networks
    - Supplementary materials
        - **Estonian cleanup: “Let’s do it!”**
            - [Country clean-up project "let's do it"](https://youtu.be/A5GryIDl0qY)
            - This fast-paced (5 min) video shows how Estonian activists organized themselves as an ad hoc community to clean up the country’s 10,000 tons of waste in a single day! This is a shining example of the [[Power]] of community action.
        - **Flash mob opera in Pamplona**
            - [AGAO: Dia Europeo de la Opera en Pamplona. CORO "Premier Ensambe" de AGAO](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NLjuGPBusxs&feature=emb_logo)
            - This beautiful 7-minute video about a flash mob opera performance in Pamplona, Spain, is a moving testimony to the power of music in community building.
- Lecture 8: Life, Mind and Society
    - We'll look at extending the systems view of life from biological/cognitive dimesions to the social dimension.
    - Two strong influences (social scientists/organisational theorists) 
        - Margaret Wheatley
        - Manuel Castells
    - The conceptual framework I've developed rests on the assumption that theres a fundamental unity to life and that living systems exhibit similar patterns of organisation wherever we encounter life.
    - This is assumption supported by the observation that in evolution, it has proceeded for billions of years using the same patterns over and over again.
    - As living organisms and species become more complex, the patterns do so also but they are always variations on the same basic themes. 
    - In the history of human evolution, a fundamental link between social phenomena and consciousness was established about 4m years ago with the appearance of the first upright walking apes (Australopithecus afarensis) 
    - The new freedom of their hands, allowed them to make tools, wield weapons, throw rocks. Anthropologists suggest that this stimulated rapid brain growth and this growth characteristic of human evolution lead to language and reflective consciousness.
    - While they developed complex brains, tool making capabilities and language these hominids gave birth to very helpless infants that were prematurely born in comparison to other animals, leading to the formation of families and communities that became the foundation of human social life.
    - So the evolution of language and human consciousness was inextricably linked to technology and organised relations. So there was an evolutionary nexus around 4m years ago that led to language, consciousness, tool making/technology, complex brains and organised social relations.
    - From an evolutionary perspective its very natural to ground the understanding of social phenomena in a unified conception of life and consciousness. 
    - One important characteristic of consciousness is to be capable of creating mental images, holding mental images of distant or future objects and because we can do that we can imagine future situations to and choose between these alternatives which gives rise to values. 
    - We develop certain personal and cultural values, but as soon as you have values you also get conflicts of interest due to great diversity. You thus have individual values that differ giving rise to conflicts.
    - These conflicts then are the origin of relationships of power. 
    - We have all these social phenomena, values, relationships of power, conflicts of interests - all arising out of the ability to form abstract images!
    - Now let's see what social scientists have said about the social domain of life. The study of society is the domain of sociology, social science or social theory. Its very broad and includes a great variety of academic disciplines known as the social sciences, which contrast with the natural sciences.
    - In addition to the core discipline of sociology; the social sciences include such fields as anthropology, economics, political science, management theory, history and law to name a few!
    - When we look at the history of social science, we see that in the late 19th and 20th centuries, social thought was greatly influenced by a school of thought known as positivism. A doctrine formulated by Auguste Comte in France who asserted that the social sciences should search for general laws of human behaviour, they should emphasise quantification and they should reject all explanations in regards to subjective phenomena - such as intention or purpose (to be excluded from the social sciences).
    - This positivist framework was clearly patterned after the framework of Newtonian physics (Comte first termed this social physics)
    - The major schools of thought in early 20th century sociology were attempts at emancipation from this framework of logical positivism. Different scientists identified themselves differently but always in relation to positivism which they sought to overcome. 
    - In these attempts, several social scientists were influenced by the new approach of systems thinking which was being developed around the same time through interdisciplinary dialogues between biologists, psychologists and ecologists - which influenced the social scientists.
    - However, none of them managed to really integrate their understanding of social phenomena with the basic ideas about the relevant biological and cognitive phenomena that were developed in the natural sciences in that time.
    - This may have been due to the fact that even though the basic connections between consciousness, culture and social phenomena were recognised by these social scientists, they lacked a conceptual framework to really integrate these realisations.
    - This integration had to wait until the mid and late 20th century, with the development of complexity theory or non-linear dynamics, the development of the concept of cognitive autopoietic networks and the wide appreciation of networks of communications, and all this provided a proper conceptual framework to really integrate the social sciences and the natural sciences.
    - Lets discuss the most important aspects of this new systemic framework
        - The extension of the systems view of life to the social domain is based on the assumption that there is a fundamental unity to life and that different living systems exhibit similar patterns of organisation. 
        - In particular there is one pattern of organisation that is characteristic of life which is the network. In all living systems to the food webs of ecosystems, the components and processes of living systems are integrated and interlinked in a networked fashion.
        - Extending the systemic conception of life to the social domain means first and foremost extending our understanding of networks to the social domain. 
        - WARNING: to add notions of complexity, network dynamics, feedback alone is not enough. We can learn from the organisation of biological networks and extend this to the organisation of social networks. But we should not transfer our understanding of social structures, which is a very different matter!
            - Lets take the metabolic network of a cell as an example: 
                - A cellular network is a non linear pattern of organisation and we can use complexity theory or non-linear dynamics to understand the intricacies of this pattern. But the cell is also a chemical system, and so if we don't understand biochemistry we're not going to understand the cell. If we don't know what an enzyme is and how it catalyses the production or synthesis of a protein, we're never going to understand the cellular network to its full extent.
                - Similarly a social network is a non-linear pattern of organisation, and concepts discovered in complexity theory like feedback or emergence will be useful in understanding social networks. However the nodes and links in social networks are not merely biochemical, social networks are first and foremost networks of communication involving symbolic language, cultural constraints, relationships of power and so on.
                - I've often encountered network theorists in the past, say in an organisation, that produce beautiful diagrams to show who talks to whom and how often, the feedback loops and so on... but never asked what they talk about! And if you don't understand that, you won't understand the social network to its full extent!
                - So in addition to systems theory and complexity theory, we need to use insights from social theory, philosophy, cognitive science, anthropology, political science etc. - only then will we have a unified framework of being able to understand biological and social phenomena!
        - With this caveat, lets now try apply our knowledge of living networks to social phenomena
            - First we need to find out if autopoiesis, the defining characteristic of biological life in the systems view, can be applied to the social domain.
            - This approach has been formulated by a German sociologist called [[Niklas Luhman]], who coined the theory social autopoiesis.
            - According to Luhman, autopoiesis in living networks of human society are networks of communication which are self generating. But what they generate is mostly non-material, so you have communications and each communication generates, thoughts, information, meaning, ideas - and these trigger new communications. In this way the network generates itself over time - it is autopoietic!
            - As communications continue in such a social network, eventually they will form multiple feedback loops, and as a result there will be an emergence of a shared system of beliefs, explanations and of values. A common context of meaning - AKA culture!
            - **Culture is the common context of meaning that is continually sustained by further communications. You can also say that a social network as communications continue will form a community**
                - Not all social networks are communities. A community arises when you have a common context of meaning, a common culture or a common set of values - then we can talk of community. 
            - Etymologically it's quite interesting how the term culture was used at different times in different centuries. The origin of the term culture was a cultivation of crops, it was then extended metaphorically to cultivating the human mind - a cultured person is a person with a cultured mind, or educated mind. Only much later was culture used as a distinctive way of a people, and then it was used by anthropologists in the plural as different cultures characteristic of different peoples. Much later still it was used as the distinctive life of a much smaller community such as an organisation - thus we now speak of organisation culture.
            - The dynamics of culture is also very interesting, because through culture individuals inquire identities as members of the community by acquiring identities at the same time they restrict their behaviour. When belonging to a community we restrict our behaviour in various ways and we all belong to communities where we behave differently.
            - This can be observed very distinctly in teenagers. When you observe cliques of teens, they restrict their behaviour by dressing a certain way, growing their hair a certain way, talking a certain way. The whole language, if you don't use language a certain way, your outside the clique!
            - This is how a community defines its boundaries, so the main point is here that a social network leads to the emergence of a community characterised by a set of shared values, a culture which creates a boundary around the community. This boundary is constantly maintained and renegotiated by the network itself.
            - The dimension of meaning is crucial to understanding social networks, even when social networks generate material structures (products, artifacts, works of art etc.), these structures are very different from the structures of biological organisms. 
            - Material structures produced by humans are usually produced for a purpose, are produced according to some design and embody some meaning. These are all aspects of human consciousness. 
            - For example the room; we put up objects that encompass meaning - Natarasha the god of dance, a poster of the Vitruvian man, and part of mollusk known as a nautilus shell famous for its growth spiral. 
                - First book the DAO of physics was triggered by a very profound recognition of a parallel between the dance of the Hindu god shiva and the dance of subatomic particles. Then the last book before the Systems View was a book on the science of Leonardo Da Vinci which I studied in great depth. So these two are book ends of my life as a writer, and then the Nautilus shell with its growth spiral is a symbol lifes self organisation. 
            - But this is true of most items in our environment, they embody some sort of either personal or cultural meaning. Meaning is essential to human beings; we need to constantly make sense of their outer and inner worlds. Meaning is always related to context, an experience or understanding of context. 
            - This includes in particular our need to act with a goal in mind. Because of our ability to project mental images into the future, we act with a conviction (true or false) that our actions are voluntary, intentional or purposeful.
            - Now lets summarise and juxtapose social and biological networks 
                - Biological networks 
                    - Operate in the realm of matter
                    - Produces material structures
                    - Cells - exchanges molecules in networks of chemical reactions
                    - Produce and sustain a material boundary that imposes constraints on the chemistry that takes place inside it
                - Social networks 
                    - Operate in the realm of meaning
                    - Produces material structures (and also nonmaterial characteristics of culture)
                    - Cells - exchange information and ideas in networks of communications
                    - Produce and sustain a nonmaterial cultural boundary that imposes constraints on the behaviour of its members. 
            - The comparison between biological and social networks are a rich field for further investigation. 
            - Now lets turn to one of the more striking characteristics of social realities; power.
                - [[John Kenneth Galbraith]] "The exercise of power, the submission of some to the will of others, is inevitable in modern society; nothing what so ever is accomplished without it... Power can be socially malign it is also socially essential." [[Quotes]]
                - Now this essential role of power in social organisation is linked to inevitable conflicts of interest that arise in all social networks. 
                - Because of our ability to affirm preferences and to make choices accordingly, and because of our individuality. Conflicts of interest will necessarily appear in human communities and power is the means by which conflicts are resolved.
                - We have to be careful here because power does not necessarily imply the threat or use of violence. 
                - [[John Kenneth Galbraith]] distinguishes between three types of power based on the means by which they are employed
                    - Coercive power - which wins submission by inflicting or threatening sanctions
                    - Compensatory power - which offers incentives and rewards
                    - Conditioned power - the power of changing beliefs through persuasion and education
                - To find the right mixture of these three types of power to resolve conflicts is the art of politics. 
                - Turning to the negative aspects of power, these arise when associated with the advancements of ones own interests rather than the advancement of the community. 
                - According to [[John Kenneth Galbraith]] individuals and groups seek power to advance their own interests and to extend to others their personal, religious or social values. This is when power becomes linked with exploitation. 
                - Theres a further stage of power which is reached when power is pursued  not only for the sake of ones own interests, but for power for the sake of power. 
                - It can have an intoxicating effect on people, bring high emotional rewards and of course material rewards and is conveyed by elaborate symbols and rituals which people get off on, or very high emotional rewards. Standing ovations, military salutes, office suites, limos, corporate jets - all these are the trappings of power that have high emotional rewards for some people...
                - Any community will have to develop means of its members exerting power to resolve conflicts - so power is conveyed to people and invested with power. 
                - As the community grows, and increases in complexity its positions of power and their complexities will also increases. So in complex societies, resolutions of conflicts and decisions about how to act will be effective if authority and power are organised within administrative structures. Numerous forms of social organisation have been generated by this need to organise the distribution of power, playing a central role in the emergence of social structures.
                - In social theory, the term "social structure" has a specific technical meaning thats different to the "natural sciences". A main stumbling block in developing this synthesis. In chemistry, biology and physics we mean something physical; in the social sciences it means **"a pattern of social arrangements"** which are essentially rules of conduct and social structures include all rules of conduct, whether they are informal or formal, structured and enforced by laws. 
                - All formal structures or social institutions, are ultimately rules of behaviour that facilitate decision making and embody relationships of power.
                - This crucial link between power and social structures has been discussed extensively by social scientists. In the classical texts on power, for example those by sociologist and economist [[Max Weber]] for instance, we find the statement "domination has played the decisive role... in the economically most important social structures of the past and present." [[Quotes]]
                - Political theorist [[Hannah Arendt]] writes "All political institutions are manifestations and materializations of power" [[Quotes]]
                - To conclude the discussion power, let's discuss power in social networks.  They have become a major focus in recent years not only in science but also society at large and throughout a newly emerging global culture
                - Social networks of course have existed in human society since the beginning of time and through out history, but the recent information technology revolution has given them unprecedented flexibility and global scale which has made them the dominant feature of our age 
                - According to [[Manuel Castells]] society in the early 21st century is characterised by a social structure that he calls the network society, where the nature of power is an important and intriguing issue.
                - [[Manuel Castells]] distinguishes between several distinct types of power (in social networks), the paramount form of power in a social network is the power to constitute networks. This means connecting individuals and institutions to these networks or excluding them from the networks and to interconnect networks. 
                - In addition to power as domination (the three types of power referred to by [[John Kenneth Galbraith]]) there is a different type of power as empowerment of others. 
                - Power as domination is most effectively organised in hierarchies, while power as empowerment is most effectively organised in a network. In a social network, people are empowered by being connected to the network. 
                - In such a network the success of the whole network depends on its individual members, and the success of the individuals depends on the network as a whole. Any enrichment of individuals will not harm the network but enrich it as a whole.
                - The certain hubs in a social network become centres of power and authority. On the internet for example, the hubs which have the most connections/links become the authorities sought out by people in various fields.
                - The extension of the systems view of life extended to the social domain, explicitly included the material world which is unusual. Traditionally we have arranged our academic disciplines in such a way that the natural sciences deal with matter and the social sciences deal with relationships and social structures/rules of behaviour.
                - In the future this seperation will no longer be possible, becuase the key challange for everyone will be to build and nurture sustainable communities designed in such a way that their technologies and social institutions (materials and social structures) will not interfere with natures inherent ability to sustain life.
                - If we want to do so then the design principals of our future social institutions must be consistent with the principals of organisation that ecosystems have evolved to sustain the web of life. 
                - And to do so a unified conceptual framework for the understanding of material and social structures will be essential. This is the main reason why the integration of the biological and social components is so important!  
