---
Tags: [Course]
---

# Capra Course L9

- [Link](https://spring.capracourse.net/lessons/lecture-9-life-leadership-organizations/)
    - Summary
        - In this lecture, I discuss the implications of the systemic understanding of biological and social networks for management and leadership. In recent years, “change management“ has become very popular because of a widespread feeling that today's businesses need to undergo a fundamental transformation to flourish in today's complex business environment and to be become ecologically sustainable. However, the track record, so far, has been rather poor. From a systems point of view, the main obstacle to organizational change today is the embrace by business leaders of the machine metaphor for management. In the lecture, I discuss the main characteristics of the mechanistic view of management and then contrast it with the systemic view.
        - (__Section 14.5.1__)
        - A core issue is the realization that every human organization has a dual nature.
        - It is a social institution designed for a particular purpose and, at the same time, it is a community of people who self-organize to build relationships in informal networks of communications. The aliveness of an organization — its flexibility, creative potential, and learning ability — resides in these informal networks, also known as “communities of practice.”
        - The two aspects of the organization correspond to two very different kinds of change. Mechanistically oriented managers and leaders try to have change designed by outside experts and then imposed on the organization, which is often resisted by the living individuals and communities within the organization. Systemically oriented leaders, by contrast, try to work with the natural change processes that are embedded in all living systems, and to create human organizations that mirror life's adaptability, creativity, and diversity. (__Section 14.5.2__)
        - In order to maximize an organization's creative potential, learning capabilities, and capabilities of change, it is crucial for managers and leaders to understand the interplay between the organization's formal, designed structures and the informal, ”emergent“ structures of its communities of practice. The formal structures are sets of rules and regulations that define relationships between people and tasks, as well as the distribution of [[Power]]. The informal structures are fluid and fluctuating networks of communications through which skills are exchanged and shared tacit knowledge is generated.
        - In every organization, there is a continuous interplay between the informal networks and the formal structures. Formal policies and procedures are always filtered and modified through the informal networks, which allows workers to use their creativity when faced with unexpected and novel situations. Experienced leaders recognize and support the informal networks and incorporate their innovations into the organization’s formal structures.
        - **According to the Santiago theory of cognition, discussed in Lecture 5, a living network responds to disturbances with structural changes, and it chooses both __which__ disturbances to respond to and __how__ to respond. This implies that human organizations cannot be controlled through direct interventions, but can be influenced by giving impulses rather than instructions. Meaningful disturbances will get the organization's attention and will trigger structural changes. (__Section 14.5.3__)**
        - To understand the actual change processes in organizations, the phenomenon of emergence is critical. In the lecture I review its main characteristics, and I emphasize that human organizations always contain both designed (formal) structures and and emergent (informal) structures. The challenge for managers and leaders is to find the right balance between the creativity of emergence and the stability of design.
        - I also discuss a new kind of “systemic“ leadership, which consists in facilitating the emergence of novelty. Facilitating emergence means creating conditions rather than giving directions, and it also means using the [[Power]] of authority to empower others. Leaders who facilitate emergence need to be aware of the detailed dynamics of all stages of this process, which I discuss in some detail in the lecture. (__Section 14.5.4__)
        - In conclusion, I point out that organizations that are truly alive will be able to flourish only when we change our economic system to make it life-enhancing rather than life-destroying (__Section 14.6__). The systemic understanding of life makes it clear that in the coming years such a change will be imperative not only for the well-being of human organizations, but for the sustainability of humanity as a whole. This is the subject of the last three lectures of the course.
    - Key takeaways
        - Civil society
            - A set of organizations and institutions — churches, political parties, unions, cooperatives, and various voluntary associations — that form an interface between the state and its citizens
        - Creativity, systems view of
            - The generation of novelty through a process of emergence
        - Organization, human
            - An entity comprising multiple people, which always has a dual nature: a social institution, designed for a specific purpose, and a cluster of informal social networks (communities of practice) in which the organization’s aliveness resides
        - Leadership, systems view of
            - In organizational theory, the action of facilitating the emergence of novelty by creating conditions rather than giving directions, and using the [[Power]] of authority to empower others
        - Community of practice
            - An informal social network within a human organization involving various alliances friendships, and informal channels of communication, and pursuing a joint enterprise
        - Structural changes, cyclical (Social)
            - Changes of self-renewal in a living organism (continual replacement of cells, renewal of tissues, etc.)
        - Structural changes, developmental (Social)
            - Changes in a living organism in which new structures are created
        - Knowledge, explicit
            - Knowledge that can be communicated and documented through language
        - Knowledge, tacit
            - Knowledge, also known as “common sense,” that is acquired through experience and often remains implicit and impossible to articulate
    - Supplementary Material
        - Integrative Design - Systems thinking in action
            - [High Performance Building - Performance by design](https://youtu.be/hIX-J83lmaI)
            - In this 28-minute video, [[Amory Lovins]] and his colleagues at the [[Rocky Mountain Institute]] explain the principles of integrative design. I discuss integrative design in Lecture 12, but I am posting this video here because it is also a very good example of the idea of systemic leadership (leadership as facilitating creativity and emergence) that I introduce in Lecture 9.
        - The Hoberman Sphere: from objects to relationships
            - [The Hoberman Sphere and the systems view of organisations](https://youtu.be/Ft3MFMa87wE)
            - In this short (4 min) video clip, Simon Robinson, coauthor of __Holonomics: Business Where People and Planet Matter__, illustrates the expansion of perspective from objects to relationships (a key characteristic of systems thinking) with the so-called Hoberman Sphere. Simon and his wife Maria use this surprising device regularly to teach systems thinking in organizations.
- Life and Leadership in Organisations
    - In the last lecture I presented the extension of the systems view of life into the social domain, integrating the systemic understanding of the social and biological networks. In the social sciences, such a systemic approach has found its greatest advocates in management science - and this is the subject of todays lecture.
    - In recent years the nature of human organisations has been discussed extensively in business and management circles, in response to a widespread feeling that todays businesses need to undergo a fundamental redesign and reorganisation to adapt to a new global business environment, which is virtually unrecognisable from the point of view of traditional management science and practice - so there needs to be a profound transformation!
    - More over, it is becoming evermore apparent that our complex industrial systems - both organisationally and technologically - are the main driving forces for global and environmental destruction. Therefore they need fundamental redesign and reorganisation to become ecologically sustainable. 
    - So this double challenge, the complexity of todays business environment and the need to become ecologically sustainable is urgent and real. The recent extensive discussions on change management is fully justified.
    - However in-spite of these extensive discussions and some anecdotal evidence of successful redesigning of companies, by and large the track records have been fairly poor.
    - In recent surveys CEOs have reported again and again that their efforts of organisational change did not yield the promised results, and rather than managing a changed organisation they had to manage the unwanted side effects of their change efforts!
    - Over the years, from my discussions with many organisational theorists, managers and leaders, it became evident to me that one of the main obstacles to organisational change today is the largely unconscious embrace of the machine metaphor. 
        - In this mechanistic view a company is created and owned by people outside the system, its structures and goals are designed by management or by outside experts who are brought in. This design is then imposed on the organisation as a machine must be controlled by operators to function properly according to their instruction, so the main thrust by management theory has been to achieve efficient operations through top down control. 
        - Seeing the company as a machine also implies that eventually it will run down, machines run down unless they are continually serviced, updated, repaired and so on. A machine cannot change by itself, all changes must be designed by someone else and thats is then applied to organisations.
        - 1990: the mechanistic catch phrase of re-engineering was invented to describe this redesign of human organisations along mechanistic lines!
        - This largely unconscious embrace of the machine metaphor, has become so widespread and deeply ingrained in managers that to think about organisations for most of them means to think about the designed formal structures linked by clear lines of coordination, communication and control and this has become second nature.
        - In my view the core problem is a confusion arising from the dual nature of human organisations. I spent many years looking for an answer to the question; is an organisation a living system? (having developed this systems view of life). It took many years to find an answer of yes and no because every organisation has a dual aspect!
            - On one hand its a social institution designed for a particular purpose; make money for shareholders, managing the distribution of political powe, spreading religious faith and so on.
            - On the other hand however, organisations are communities of people who interact with eachother to build relationships, help eachother and make daily life meaningful within their spheres of work in the organisation
        - These two aspects of the organisation correspond to two very different aspects of change. 
            - Many CEOs are disappointed with their efforts to change largely because they expect change in a quantifiable overall manner; they see the organisation as a designed tool and when you redesign it the organisation will be different and will have changed according to the imposed redesign. 
            - However the designed structure always intersects with the organisations living individuals and communities for which change cannot be designed because they observe different laws and rules (as seen in the first part of the course). 
        - It's very common to hear people complain that organisations resist change; they say "why cant they do what I tell them, why do they resist so much?"... when in reality they don't resist change, they just resist having change imposed on them! Being alive individuals and communities are constantly changing and constantly developing... but their natural change processes are very different from the organisational change designed by reengineering experts and then imposed on the company.
        - So from the perspective of the systems view of life, in order to resolve this dilemma we first need to understand the natural change processes that are embedded in all living systems. Once we've understood these natural change processes, we can then begin to design processes of organisational change and create human organisations that mirror lifes adaptably, creativity and diversity. This is the plan of the systems view of MGMT and leadership
        - As we have learned from the theory of autopoiesis, living systems continually create, or recreate themselves by transforming or replacing their components. They undergo continual structural changes while preserving their web like pattern of organisation. 
        - So understanding life means understanding inherent change processes. You cannot understand from the point of autopoiesis the self generating networks, the patterns of organisation of these networks - unless you understand that there is continuing structural change. 
        - Therefore organisational change will appear in a new light from this point of view **once we understand clearly to what extent and in which way human organisations are alive**, being alive they change - and if we understand this connection we'll understand the natural change processes
        - To repeat, living social systems which I discussed in the last lecture are self generating networks of communications. This means that a human organisation will be alive only if it is a network of communications or if it contains smaller networks of communications. 
        - Organisational theorists have come to realise that informal social networks, exist within every organisation and arise from various alliances, friendships, informal channels of communication and other webs of relationships from within the organisation that continually grow, change and adapt to new situations - these are informal webs of relations which organisational theorists  call communities of practice.
    - As far as human organisations are concerned we can now see that their **dual nature of legal and economic entities on the one hand, and communities of people on the other hand** derives from the fact that various communities of practice invariably arise in every organisation. 
    - There is a cluster of interconnected communities of practice in every organisation, and the more people that are engaged in these networks and the more developed and sophisticated these informal networks are - the better the organisation will be able to change and evolve.
    - **In other words, the aliveness of an organisation resides in its communities of practice. Therefore in order to maximise an organisations creative potential, learning capabilities and adaptability - it will be crucial for managers and leaders to understand the interplay between the formal designed structures and the informal naturally occuring communities of practice. **
    - The formal structures and sets of rules and regulations that define relationships between people and tasks, the distribution of [[Power]], establish boundaries by means of contract or department and so on. All of these structures are depicted in the organisations official documents, charts, bylaws, manuals, budget and so on. They describe the organisations formal policies, strategies and procedures
    -  The informal structures by contrast are fluid and fluctuating networks of communication through which skills are exchanged and tacit knowledge is generated, knowledge that doesn't appear in the official documents. Fore example; a new employee arrives in the organisation with a job description in her hand and on the first day a colleague takes her aside and says "let me show you how we do things here".. this is the informal network or tacit knowledge. 
    - The distinction of whether you belong to a certain informal network or not may be as simple as being able to follow a certain conversation, follow a joke or know the lates gossip. If you can do that your part of the informal network
    - Informal networks of communications are embodied in people that form the network. When people leave the organisation the network will reconfigure itself or it may even disappear! When new people join the organisation the same thing, a reconfiguration of the network.
    - In the formal organisation thats very different because there functions and [[Power]] relations are more important than the people. And these functions and [[Power]] relations persist over the years as people come and go, so theres a big difference between the formal and informal structures.
    - It's important to recognise theres a continuous interplay between the informal networks and the formal structures. Formal policies and procedures are always filtered through the informal networks and they are modified. This allows workers to user their creativity when faced with unexpected and novel situations. 
    - For example, industrial action called "work to rule" is where workers don't strike but instead do everything by the book - as a result everything slows down the organisation is grinding on not working smoothly because it lacks the informal helping each other that makes things much smoother!
    - In an organisation that is smart, the formal organisation will recognise and support the informal networks and relationship, and incorporate its innovators into its structures.
    - To repeat the aliveness of an organisation, its flexibility, creative potential and learning ability resides in its informal communities of practice. The formal organisation is alive as far as how closely it is in-touch with its informal networks. 
        - Experienced managers and leaders know this and know how to work with the informal organisation. Typically the routine work will be left to the formal organisation but when something unexpected happens beyond the routine they will rely on the informal relationships and communications. 
        - Or when they have certain important information, they will tell this to certain people with whom they know will communicate this within certain informal networks so it will circulate rapidly
        - These considerations imply that the most effective way to enhance an organisations potential for creativity and learning is to support and strengthen its communities of practice. The first step in such an endeavour will be to provide the space for these communities of practice to develop and flourish to acknowledge them and legitimise them.
        - The more managers and leaders know about the detailed processes in self generating social networks, the more effective they will be in working with them
    - Lets see what kind of lessons managers and leaders can learn from the systems view of life about how to interact with the informal networks within the organisation - coming back to Santiago theory of cognition:
        - A living network responds to a disturbance with structural changes. It chooses both which disturbances to respond to and how to respond, what people notice depends on who they are and the cultural characteristics of their communities of practice
        - A message will get through to them, not so much because it is repeated or signalled loudly but much more effectively if the message is actually meaningful to them. Then it will not only get through to them but it will circulate in the informal networks
        - We are dealing here with a crucial difference between a living system and a machine... A machine can be controlled, a living system can only be disturbed - which implies a human organisation can not be controlled by direct intervention but can be influenced by giving impulses rather than instructions
        - To change the conventional form of management in this way requires a perceptual shift that is not easy, but it also brings rewards. Working with the processes inherent in living systems means we do not need to spend a lot of energy to move an organisation
        - If as a leader I have a new idea and I work with the organisations informal networks, the issue is not to push, pull or bully the organisation or somehow cleverly sell the new idea to my coworkers... so the issue is not force or energy - **its meaning**, which will get the organisations attention and trigger structural changes
        - We need to realise that offering impulses and guiding principals, rather than strict instructions evidently amounts to a big shift in [[Power]] relations. Changes from domination and control to cooperation and partnership, and this too is a fundamental implication of the new understanding of life.
        - As mentioned in the lecture about evolution, biologists and ecologists have come to realise that most relationship between organisms in nature are essentially cooperative ones. The tendency to associate, establish links, cooperate, to maintain symbiotic relationships is one of the hall marks of life.
        - Now if the aliveness of an organisation resides in its communities of practice and if learning, creativity, change and development are inherent in all living systems - then how do these processes actually manifest themselves concretely in the organisations living network and communities?
            - To answer this question I need to return to a key characteristic of life mentioned in the third lecture, which is the spontaneous emergence of new order at critical points of instability
            - As mentioned, the constant generation of novelty is a key property of all living systems. In a human organisation, the event triggering the process of emergence may just be an offhand comment that someone makes that maybe doesnt even consider it important by the espouser himself, but the comment is meaningful to another individual or community of practice and is picked up and that information circulates around feedback loops
            - And as it happens, this comment as it circulates around gets amplified, others add to it etc. to such an extent that the organisation as a whole cannot absorb the novelty in its present state. And when that happens a point of instability has been reached. 
            - **The system cannot integrate the new information into its existing structures and its forced to abandon some of its structures, or its behaviour or its beliefs. The result can be that of chaos, confusion, uncertainty or of doubt, which is the instability that proceeds emergence - so out of that chaotic state a new form of order emerges, organised around new meaning.**
            -  The new order was not designed by any individual but emerged as a result of the organisations creative mode of functioning and collective creativity. Through out the living world the creativity of life expresses itself through the process of emergence. The structures created in this way - either biological or social - are called emergent structures. 
            - Its important to realise that human organisations always contain both designed structures and emergent structures, which correspond to the formal and informal structures.
                - The designed structures are the formal structures as described in the legal documents
                - The emergent structures created by the organisations informal networks and communities of practice 
            - The two types of structure are very different as we've seen and every organisation needs both, which is important to  realise
                - Designed structures provide the rules and routines that are necessary for the effective functioning of the organisation. Designed structures provide stability. e.g. we have a group here in this course and we meet at a certain time/place and have designed a process for the lectures to take place.
                - Emergent structures on the other hand provide novelty, creativity and flexibility. They are adaptive, capable of change and of evolution. e.g. when engaging in discussion on the course, theres no designed order people speak, comment and new ideas emerge
            - In todays complex business environment, purely designed structures don't have the necessary responsiveness or learning capability to survive. The issue is not one of discarding designed structures in favour of emergent structures, we need both, and in every human organisation there is a tension between the designed structures and the emergent structures - simply because the designed structures embody [[Power]] relationships and if you change the designed structure in response and in interaction with the emergent structures, you change [[Power]] relationships - which is not easy. The challenge then for managers and leaders then is to find the right balance between the creativity of emergence and the stability of design.
            - Let me say a few words now about leadership; the understanding of the importance of emergence for the human organisation has led to new kinds of leadership. The traditional idea of a leader is that of a person who is able to hold a vision, articulate it clearly and communicate it with charisma. 
            - There is another form of leadership and that consists in facilitating emergence of novelty. Facilitating emergence means creating conditions rather than giving directions and it also means to use the [[Power]] of authority to empower others. Facilitating emergence means facilitating creativity, and this type of leadership is not limited to a single person at the top of a hierarchy but it can be excersised by anybody within the organisation and actually this leadership of facilitating emergence is much more effective if its distributed throughout the organisation.
            - How do you facilitate emergence? Well, you need to recognise and understand the different stages of this fundamental life process
                - First of all you need an active network of communications, so facilitating emergence means building up and nurturing networks of communications. In addition we need to remember that emergence is a property of open systems, which means that the organisation needs to be open to new ideas, new knowledge and new information and facillitating means to create that openness. To create a learning culture where that questioning and innovation are rewarded. 
                - Now the experience of that critical instability that precedes the emergence of novelty may involve, uncertainty, fear, confusion, self doubt and so on. And at this point, experienced leaders recognise these emotions as integral parts of the whole dynamics and communicate these dynamics and try to create a climate of trust and mutual support. 
                - This is where trust becomes so important in an organisation because during the change process, some of the old structures may fall apart, but if the supportive climate and the feedback loops within the network persists - new and more meaningful structures are likely to emerge. And when that happens people are likely to feel a sense of wonder and elation, which many of us have experienced in our own thinking or in groups. 
                - The experience of emergence is in a sense an experience of magic, its a highly non-linear process and our thinking is largely linear so we cannot follow all the various steps in this process of emergence, and when suddenly the new order or idea emerges we have a feeling of magic. Over the years, I've come to think the scientific term for magic is non-linearity, thats why we experience magic!
                - When this magic happens the role of the leader then is to acknowledge these emotions and provide opportunities for celebration.
                - So leaders who facilitate emergence need to be aware of the detailed dynamics of all these stages, recognise the emergent novelty, articulate it and incorporate it into the organisations design
                - Theres then an intersection between the two types of leadership; leader as a visionary and leader as a designer are very important when the novelty needs to be integrated into the rest of organisation.
                - You'll remember that when I spoke of evolution, I spoke about various avenues of evolution leading to genetic changes, and after these genetic changes happen they need to be integrated into the cellular metabolism, which is a highly ordered, complex and cognitive activity. At a much higher level of complexity this is true for the emergence of novelty in organisations.
                - We should also realise that not everything that emergences is good or viable, just as in nature emergence is always followed by natural selection. Now it becomes the task of the leadership team to analyse if its actually viable within the context of the organisation.
                - This also means that the fostering of emergence must also include the freedom to make mistakes, because not everything that emerges will be useful to the organisation. In such a culture experimentation is encouraged and learning is valued just as much as success.
            - Well in conclusion I want to emphasise that bringing life into human organisations by empowering their communities of practice not only increases the flexibility, creativity and learning potential of the organisation, but it also enhances the dignity and humanity of the individuals who work in the organisation because these individual connect with these qualities within themselves. It creates mentally and physically and emotionally healthy working environments in which people feel that they are supported in striving towards achieving their own goals without having to sacrifice their integrity to serve the organisation. 
            - This all sounds very beautiful, but the problem is that human organisations are not only living communities but also social institutions designed for a particular purpose but also embedded within a particular economic environment... and today this environment is not life enhancing but increasingly life destroying. 
            - The more we understand the nature of life and aware of how alive an organisation can be, the more painfully we notice the life draining nature of our current economic system. 
            - It is evident that the key characteristics of todays business environment, global competition, turbulent markets, corporate mergers with rapid structural changes, increasing workloads, demands for 24/7 availability... all this combines to create a situation that is highly stressful an profoundly unhealthy. 
            - In this business climate, it is often difficult to hold on to the vision of an organisation that is alive, creative and concerned about the wellbeing of its members. 
            - In the long run, organisations that are truly alive will be able to flourish only when we change our economic system to make it life enhancing rather than life destroying. 
            - The systemic understanding of life makes it clear that such a change will be imperative not only for the wellbeing of human organisations but for the sustainability of humanity as a whole 
