---
Tags: [Course]
---

# Capra Course L7

- [Link](https://spring.capracourse.net/lessons/lecture-7-systems-view-health/)
    - Summary
        - The systems view of life has important applications in almost every field of study and every human endeavor. Whether we talk about economics, the environment, education, healthcare, law, management — all these fields have to do with individual living organisms, social systems, or with ecosystems. This is particularly true for health and healthcare, the subject of this lecture.
        - In medicine and healthcare the limits of the mechanistic worldview have become strikingly apparent. The critique of the mechanistic approach to health and healing, as well as the outlines of an alternative system of healthcare, were already developed during the late 1970s. However, the systemic approach to health has still not found broad acceptance in today's scientific medicine, even though it is now widely accepted by the general public and practiced by numerous individuals and organizations.
        - The conceptual foundation of modern scientific medicine is the so-called biomedical model, which is firmly grounded in Cartesian thought. Rather than asking why an illness occurs and trying to remove the conditions that led to it, medical science has limited itself to understanding the mechanisms through which the disease takes place, so that it can interfere with them. Paradoxically, the process of healing is excluded from current scientific medicine, because it cannot be understood within a mechanistic framework.  (__Section 15.1__)
        - The systems view of life sees health as an ongoing process, reflecting the organism's creative response to environmental challenges. Moreover, this process is multidimensional, mirroring the biological, cognitive, social, and ecological dimensions of life. In this lecture I propose a systemic definition of health, derived from the conception of a living organism as a self-generating, self-organizing network in a state of dynamic balance, characterized by multiple interdependent fluctuations.
        - Health is a state of well-being, resulting from a dynamic balance that involves the physical and psychological aspects of the organism, as well  as its interactions with its natural and social environment. (__Section 15.2__)
        - The systems view of health acknowledges the organism's capacity to heal itself, i.e. to re-establish itself in a balanced state when it has been disturbed. This may involve stages of crisis and transformation, resulting in an entirely new state of balance (the phenomenon of emergence!).
        - When the systemic concept of mind, or cognition, as the process of life is adopted (see Lecture 5), it becomes evident that every illness has mental aspects. Getting sick and healing are integral parts of the life process, and therefore include a cognitive dimension. In fact, when we identify “psyche” with cognition, we can extend the notion of “psychosomatic” to the entire phenomenon of life. Health and illness, at all levels of life, are psychosomatic phenomena. The relationship between psyche and soma, mind and body, is a relationship between process and structure. Obviously, this has huge implications for medicine and for healthcare as a whole.  (__Section 15.2__)
        - In the second part of the lecture I discuss a number of guidelines for a systemic approach to healthcare, which can be derived from the systems view of health. Indeed, such a systemic approach to healthcare, known as “[[Integrative Medicine]],“ is now being developed by numerous individuals and organizations. [[Integrative Medicine]] is understood by its practitioners as a healing-oriented approach that attempts to combine the best of conventional medicine with the best of alternative, or so-called "complementary," therapies.  (__Section 15.3__)
        - Today, the forces promoting the systemic conception of health and healing work both inside and outside the medical system. While [[Integrative Medicine]] has established itself as a new scientific discipline, there has been a quiet health revolution among the general public over the last few decades. It includes extensive explorations of alternative approaches, a strong interest in traditional healing arts, and the establishment of integrative health care centers using a broad range of complementary therapies.  (__Section 15.4__)
        - From a broader perspective, we can see the current health revolution as part of a global movement, sometimes known as the global civil society, dedicated to creating a sustainable world for future generations of human and non-human living beings — a vision that is fully consistent with the systems view of life. The structure, values, strategies, and challenges of this global movement are discussed in the last lecture of the course.
    - Key concepts
        - Health, systems view of
            - A state of well-being, resulting from a dynamic balance that involves the physical and psychological aspects of the organism, as well as its interactions with its natural and social environment
        - Illness, systems view of
            - A state of imbalance, often brought about by prolonged physical, psychological, social, or environmental stress
        - Healing, systems view of
            - The organism’s innate tendency to re-establish itself in a balanced state when it has been disturbed
        - Psychosomatic, systems view of
            - In the systems view of health, the view that health and illness, at all levels of life, are psychosomatic phenomena, having a cognitive (“psychic“) and a bodily (“somatic”) dimension
        - Disease, mechanistic view of
            - The malfunctioning of biological mechanisms; see also: medicine, mechanistic
        - Balance, dynamic
            - A stable, flexible pattern of fluctuations
        - Therapist
            - From Greek therapeuin (“to attend”), defined in the Hippocratic writings as an attendant, or assistant, to the natural healing forces.
        - Medicine, integrative
            - A healing-oriented approach to health that attempts to combine the best of conventional and complementary therapies; see also: health, systems view of
    - Supplementary Materials
        - [What is Integrative Medicine](https://youtu.be/4pXsm3qaFIk)
        - In this short (2 min) video clip, one of the founders of the movement of [[Integrative Medicine]] defines this term, very much along the lines I do in Lecture 7. The main purpose of this video is to introduce one of [[Integrative Medicine]]’s best known practitioners.
- Lecture 7: The Systems View of Health
    - In the first 6 lectures, we examined the biological and congnitive dimensions of the systems view of life. Now we'll extend to the social and ecological dimensions and practical applications.
    - When you think of it, almost everything we do has to do with living systems, be it economy, law, healthcare, management - all these fields have to do with individual living organisms, social systems or ecosystems - and the interactions. 
    - The fundamental shift of perception from mechanistic to systemic will have important effects and will be relevant to all these areas; particularly health and healthcare. 
    - In this field of medicine and healthcare the limits of the mechanistic world view has become readily apparent. The conventional approach has been mechanistic and the critique of this approach, as well as the outlines of an alternative system were available since the 70's - however the systemic approach to health has still not found acceptance in todays medicine.
    - Today we can observe two separate streams in healthcare
        - The biomedical approach has become ever more efficient within its own terms, with improved computer assisted diagnostics, a vastly expanded pharmacology, minimally intrusive techniques of surgery. All of which have increased the costs of health care and have been criticised for being applied without sufficient discrimination
        - On the other hand there is a systemic and integrative vision of health and healing that is not widely accepted by the general public and media, and yet it exists as a parallel stream outside the official health care system.
    - In this lecture, we'll review the systemic critique of conventional medicine and healthcare and then outline an alternative integrative system of healthcare; the full implementation of such now being a matter of finance, financial power and political will.
    - Biomedical model
        - This is the conceptual foundation of modern scientific medicine and it is firmly grounded in cartesian thought...
        - [[Rene Descartes]] "I consider the human body as a machine... y thought compares a sick man and and ill-made clock with my idea of a heathy man and a well-made clock" [[Quotes]]
        - So the body is clockwork and the principal characteristics of current medical practice can be traced back directly to this cartesian imagery. Medical science has limited itself to biological mechanisms involved in injuries to various parts of the body. 
        - These are studied from the point of view of cellular and molecular biology - leaving out all the non-biological influences on biological processes. From the broad range of influences on our body - our mind, our social environment, our emotional state, family, food, the weather. The medical science ignores these and focuses on the biological processes.
        - At the core of medical healthcare you could say there is a confusion between the origins of disease and the mechanism/process through which a disease manifests itself. Rather than asking why an illness occurred and removing the conditions that led to it, medical researchers and practitioners often limit themselves to understanding the mechanism that takes place so they can interfere with them.
    - A systemic approach would broaden the scope from the levels of organs and cells to the entire body and on to the organisms natural and social environment
        - Such a broad systemic perspective would help medical practitioners to understand the process of healing. This is a curios situation as conventional medicine doesn't consider the process of healing as part of the scientific model... and its strange because every practicing physician or health professional knows that healing is an essential aspect of medicine, yet its not part of current scientific medicine.
        - The reason this is evident is because healing is a phenomena that cannot be understood within a mechanistic framework, and so its just left out!
    - We began by asking the question of "what is life" which led to a systems view of life, now lets ask "what is heath" which will lead us to a corresponding systems view of health. 
        - In the biophysical model, health is simply defined as the absence of disease.  And disease is defined as the malfunctioning of biological mechanisms.
        - An alternative conception of health, based on the systems view of life, begins with the realisation that it's impossible to give a precise definition of heath - because health is a largely a subjective experience who's quality can be know intuitively but never be exhaustively described or quantified. 
        - Health is a state of wellbeing that we feel and know intuitively, a state of well being that arises when an organism functions in a certain way. How does it have to function?
        - The description of a healthy way of functioning will depend on how we describe a living organism and its interactions with the environment. Different models of life will lead to different models of health! So our understanding of health is always linked to our understanding of life. 
        - Therefore the concept of health, as well as the related concepts of illness, disease, pathology and so on do not refer to well defined entities but are integral parts of our integral and approximate models which mirror the complex and fluid phenomena of life!
        - Once we have recognised this relative and subjective view of heath, we can begin to explore how the systems view of life can lead to a corresponding systems view of health. 
        - During this course I've repeatedly emphasised that the systems view of life and systems thinking in general is process thinking. We always understand biological structures in terms of processes, we also understand social networks in terms of processes. 
        - Rather than defining heath as a static state of perfect wellbeing, the systems view sees heath as an ongoing process and this process reflects the organisms response to environmental challenge. 
        - We always see living organisms as being open systems in continual interaction with the environmental  and as being cognitive systems as responding to environmental disturbances cognitively in an autonomous way. 
        - Since a persons condition will always depend on the interactions with the natural and social environment, there can be no absolute level of health independent of that environment. 
        - The continual changes of ones organism in relation to the changing environment will naturally include temporary phases of illness or ill health and it will often be impossible to sharply draw a line between health and illness. 
        - When traveling around various seminars, sometimes we might over do it, exert ourselves too much and get a sore throat. If the schedule is interrupted and I rest for a few days the sore throat will go away. Was that an illness? or a healthy response to a stressful environment that forced me to change my pace and maintain my health? Its not easy to say what is health and what is illness...  its a fluctuating phenomenon
        - Its also a multidimensional process, from the systems point of view the experience illness results from patterns of disorder and since the organism is self organising, autonomous and responds to disturbance by specifying the structural changes in an autonomous way there may be a variety of responses... they can be psychological - e.g. stress as a skin rash - we can also respond by getting anxious or depressed. Or we can respond socially by antisocial behaviour, getting angry, violent, driving recklessly. All these are forms of illness in the biological, cognitive/psychological or social domains.
        - This means that all the domains of life - the biological, cognitive, social and ecological (which are integrated in the systems view of life) - correspond to similar dimensions of health. So health is a really broad systemic concept, corresponding to the above concepts.
        - This is a basic framework of how a systems approach can be applied to health. 
        - Applying the systems view to health
            - A living system is understood as a self generating, self organising network that displays a high degree of stability which is utterly dynamic and consists of multiple interconnected fluctuations. 
            - All the variables of a living system fluctuate continually between tolerance limits. The more dynamic the state of the system, the greater the flexibility of the system and its ability to adapt to environmental changes (and therefore its ability to stay healthy).
            - Loss of flexibility weather its physical, mental, social, technological, economic etc. is loss of health. 
            - We've also learned that the living system responds to disturbances in the environment cognitively and autonomously. The resultant structural changes can either be of self renewal or development. 
            - This living view of living organisms suggests the notion of dynamic balance as a core concept to define health. **Such a state of balance of is not a static equilibrium but rather a flexible pattern of fluctuations.** 
            - With this meaning of dynamic balance in mind, lets define health as **a state of wellbeing resulting from a dynamic balance that involves the physical and psychological dimensions of an organism as well as its interactions with its natural and social environment**. 
                - This is consistent with many traditional models of health and healing which  acknowledge the natural healing forces in the organism that is the organisms innate tendency to reestablish itself in a balanced state when its been disturbed. 
                - This reestablishment of balance my include stages of crisis and transformation resulting in an entirely new state of balance. Once again we are talking about emergence or a new state of order, and in this case of health. 
                - To describe the imbalance of an organism, that is a state of ill-health, the concept of stress has proven very useful. Temporary stress is an essential part of life, it's an essential part of the fluctuating organism encountering obstacles becoming temporality more rigid and then adapting. While prolonged or chronic stress can be harmful and plays a significant role in the development of many diseases. 
                - The key element in the link between stress and illness that has been explored in the previous decades, is that fact that prolonged stress suppresses the bodies immune system, which plays an essential role in the self organisation of the living organisims
            - Cognitive dimension of health
                - The systemic conception of life includes a radical new view of mind and consciousness. Mind is not a thing but a process, the process of cognition which is identified with life. 
                - The organising activity of a living organism is mental activity, and its interaction with the environment is cognitive or mental interactions
                - When this concept of cognition is adopted it becomes evident that every illness has mental aspects because getting sick and healing are integral parts of the life process, and since that process is identified with cognition its is obvious that both getting sick and healing have a cognitive/psychological dimension - even if it lies in the unconscious!
                - There is thus an interplay between the biological dimension and the psychological dimension! We can use and redefine the term psychosomatic, when we remember the root meaning of psyche (breath of life, mind/cognition)... soma (body) - and identify it with the entire process of life. 
                - **We can then say that health and illness at all levels of life are psychosomatic phenomena!** They have a cognitive and biological dimensions or **a relationship between process and structure!**
                - This obviously has huge implications for medicine. 
            - Healing process
                - The systemic understanding of health and illness implies a corresponding systemic understanding of healing, many traditional models of health/healing acknowledge the self healing capacities in every organism or the innate capacity to reestablish itself in a balanced state post disturbance. 
                - In systemic language this tendency is associated with the self balancing feedback loops which bring us back into balance, and as mentioned this may include the self amplifying feedback loops which lead us to a state of crisis after which comes a new state of order or health.
                - It often happens that as people go through this process they come out at the other end feeling healthier than before the illness, because they have now changed the patterns of their life, made some dramatic changes or reached a new level of being/health
                - Healing then - as the organisms innate tendency to reestablish itself in balance - includes the various phases of health and illness beginning with minor illness (sore throat) to more serious illnesses which require greater efforts (such as help from a doctor or therapist) and may include these stages of crisis and transofrmation
                - This implies a number of guidelines for a corresponding approach to healthcare. Such a systemic approach has been developed over the last four decades by numerous people/groups involving physicians, biologists, public health professionals, nurses, psychologists et. al in various other professions
                - In the 1970's and 80's the leading catchphrases of these new approaches were holistic healthcare, holistic medicine, alternative medicine, wellness and so on. They were used to distinguish this approach from the traditional medical approach. In the subsequent decades the term **"[[Integrative Medicine]]"** has emerged as a unifying term. 
                - **"[[Integrative Medicine]]"** is understood by its practitioners as a healing oriented approach that attempts to combine the best of conventional medicine with the best of so called complementary therapies.  
                - Today its a well established discipline with its own health centres, journals, conferences etc.
            - Lets outline the vision of a future healthcare systems based on the systemic approach to health and healing
                - Such a system of health care would have to consist of a comprehensive, effective and well integrated system of health promotion and preventive care. 
                - Since prevention is always easier than cure, healthcare will consist in maintaining and restoring the dynamic balance of individuals, families and social groups.
                - Health maintenance will be partly an individual matter and partly a collective matter. Often the two will be closely related and interconnected.
                - Individual healthcare is based on the recognition that the health of human beings is determined first and foremost by their behaviour, food and the nature of their environment. We have the power and responsibility to keep our organism in balance. 
                - How? By observing some simple rules of behaviour relating to sleep, food, exercise and drugs
                - The role of therapists and health professionals will mainly be to assist us in keeping ourselves healthy and in balance. Therapist - derived from greek comes from therapeuin - "to attend"
                - The idea from the hippocratic writings, is of the therapist as an attendant or assistant to the natural healing forces. 
                - So individual responsibility will be crucial to a future system of holistic healthcare. But it will also be crucial to recognise that this is subject to severe constraints; many problems arising from economic or political forces that can only be modified only by collective action. e.g. polluted environment, toxic food, unhealthy working conditions.
                - We see that individual responsibility is very important, but it must also be accompanied by social responsibility and therefore accompanied by social action and policies.
                - The power of the systems view is seeing the individual in the environmental, social and political contexts. 
                - Social actions and policies can be seen as social healthcare and maybe even political health care. **This is all a matter of health if you see it as dynamic balance across domains.**
                - Finally, there is therapy with some outlines of what some people now call **"Integrative Therapy"**. The first and most important step in therapy is to make patients aware as fully as possible about the nature of their imbalance. 
                - This means that the their problems will have to be put into the broad context from which they arose, which will involve a careful examination of the multiple aspects of a particular illness by therapist and patient. 
                - Such an examination of the context itself is therapeutic because when you have a health problem there is always emotional stress. "Whats happening, god I don't know, I'm sweating and have a fever, I cant sleep at night". When someone can help you by pointing out the context - not eating right, exercising, etc. - when the context is clarified that itself therapeutic. Thus we see psychological counseling (not necessarily full fledged psychotherapy) will play an important role in the process of therapy. The basic aim of any therapy being to restore the patients balance. 
                - Since the underlying model of health acknowledges the organisms inherent healing forces, the therapist or doctor will only intrude minimally and try to create the environment in which the healing can take place. 
                - Such an approach to therapy will have to be multidimensional involving treatments at various levels of the mind body system and often this will involve a team effort. 
                - There are many aspects to this systemic integrative approach to healthcare that I don't have time to get into, just let's mention one: hospitals will have to be transformed into more humane institutions, they will need to be comfortable and therapeutic environments modelled after hotels or spas rather than factories or machine shops like they are today. It will also include the need for good and nourishing food. Amazingly todays hospitals have all their wing dings of medical diagnostic tools and drugs, but the food is bad and unhealthy! (inducing additional chemical and biological stress). Family members and friends will also need to be included
                - Today the forces promoting such a systemic conception of health/healing are at work both inside and outside the medical system. While [[Integrative Medicine]] has established itself as a new scientific discipline there has been a quiet health revolution among the general public over the last few decades carried by individuals and new institutions/orgs that are dissatisfied with the existing healthcare system.
                - These groups have embarked on an extensive exploration of alternative approaches including the promotion of healthy living habits combined with the recognition of personal responsibility for health and the potential for self healing and a strong interest in traditional healing arts (Ayurveda, traditional Chinese medicine, indigenous traditions etc.) and psychological/psychosomatic approaches to health and these organisations have formed many integrative healthcare centres that often experiment with a broad range of integrative therapies going hand in hand with a world wide renaissance of sustainable community oriented organic agriculture. Recognising the intimate connections between healthy soil, healthy food, healthy community and healthy individuals. 
                - We could take a broader perspective and say the current health revolution is part of a global movement sometimes known as "the global civil society" dedicated to creating a sustainable world for future generations of humans and non human living beings. A vision thats fully consistent with the systems view of life.
                - From the systemic perspective there is a profound connection between sustainability and health. You might say that sustainability and health are almost identical! A healthy organism sustains itself, a healthy community sustains itself, a healthy ecosystem sustains itself etc. **so health and sustainability are very closely connected.**
                - In the last section of this course we'll discuss the structure, values, strategies and challenges of this global movement and civil society in more detail. 
