---
Tags: [Course]
---

# Capra Course L6
- [Link](https://spring.capracourse.net/lessons/lecture-6-science-spirituality/)
    - Summary 
        - I begin this lecture with a brief review of the systems view of the origin and evolution of life on Earth — from the formation of oily droplets in the primeval oceans to the emergence of consciousness — and I ask: where is the human spirit in this scenario? I then review the original meaning of “spirit“ as the breath of life, which leads to the definition of spirituality as a way of life flowing from a profound non-ordinary experience of reality in states of heightened aliveness. The fundamental characteristics of such spiritual experiences are independent of their cultural and historical context. At the very center of spiritual experience we find a profound sense of oneness with the universe, of belonging to the cosmos as a whole. (__Section 13.2.1__)
        - I emphasize the importance of distinguishing between spirituality and religion. Religion is the organized attempt to interpret spiritual experience with words and concepts, and to use this interpretation as moral guidelines for the religious community. I discuss the three main aspects of religion — theology, morals, and ritual — all of which depend on the religious community's historical and cultural context. (__Sections 13.2 and 13.3__)
        - Spiritual experience is also known as a mystical experience because it is an encounter with mystery. The sense of oneness with the universe tends to be accompanied by a deep sense of awe and wonder together with a feeling of great humility. (__Section 13.2.1__)
        - In the discussion of morals, or ethics, I emphasize that ethical behavior is always related to the particular community to which we belong; it is behavior for the common good. Today, we belong to many communities, but there are two communities we all share. We are all members of humanity, and we all belong to the biosphere. As members of the global community of living beings, it we should behave in such a way that we do not interfere with nature’s inherent ability to sustain life. As members of the human community, our behavior should reflect a respect of human dignity and basic human rights. These principles are expanded in great detail in [[The Earth Charter]], which I briefly discuss in the lecture. It is a declaration of 16 values and principles for building a sustainable, just, and peaceful world. (__Section 13.2.4__)
        - Having established the proper framework for talking about science and spirituality, I review some statements by leading quantum physicists about parallels between modern physics and Eastern spiritual traditions, and I then summarize the basic thesis of my book __The Tao of Physics__, published in 1975. (__Section 13.4__)
        - During the decades following this publication, the relationships between science and spirituality have been explored extensively. These explorations have made it evident that the sense of oneness, which is a key characteristic of spiritual experience, is fully confirmed by the new systemic conception of life. As we understand how the roots of life reach deep into basic physics and chemistry, how the unfolding of complexity began long before the formation of the first living cells, and how life has evolved for billions of years by using again and again the same basic patterns and processes, we realize how tightly we are connected with the entire fabric of life. (__Section 13.4__)
        - Therefore, there are numerous similarities between the worldviews of mystics and spiritual teachers — both Eastern and Western — and the systemic conception of nature that is now being developed in several scientific disciplines.
        - In conclusion, I argue that ecology — and especially the recent philosophical school of deep ecology, is the ideal bridge between science and spirituality. When we look at the world around us, we find that we are not thrown into chaos and randomness but are part of a great order, a grand symphony of life. Every molecule in our body was once a part of previous bodies — living or nonliving — and will be a part of future bodies. In this sense, our body will not die but will live on, again and again, because life lives on. Moreover, we share not only life’s molecules, but also its basic principles of organization with the rest of the living world. Indeed, we belong to the universe, and this experience of belonging can make our lives profoundly meaningful. (__Section 13.6.1__)
    - Key Concepts
        - Qualia
            - States of conscious experience characterized by a special “qualitative feel“
        - Science
            - An organized body of knowledge acquired through a particular method, known as the scientific method
        - Spirituality
            - A way of being that flows from spiritual experience
        - Spiritual experience (or mystical experience)
            - A direct, non-intellectual experience of reality in a heightened state of aliveness, characterized by a profound sense of belonging to a larger whole; see also: mindfulness
        - Mindfulness
            - A Buddhist concept, understood as the practice of heightened, meditative awareness
        - Ritual
            - In religion, a ceremony involving special means, often considered sacred, to facilitate and celebrate spiritual experience for members of a religious community
        - Religion
            - The organized attempt to understand spiritual experience, to interpret it with words and concepts, and to use this interpretation as the source of moral guidelines for the religious community
        - Theology
            - Originally understood as the intellectual interpretation of spiritual experience, with God as the ultimate reference point
    - Complementary materials
        - [Brother David Steindl-Rast: “Happiness and Grateful Living”](https://youtu.be/UtBsl3j0YRQ)
            - Brother David-Steindl-Rast, Benedictine monk, psychologist, and fellow Austrian, has been an inspiration for me for many years. He has a great talent of expressing deep spiritual truths in simple, direct language, and with a great deal of charm. This TED talk, filmed in 2014 in Edinborough, Scotland, shows him at his best.
        - [Miyoko Shida: “The Incredible Power of Concentration”](https://youtu.be/dUgAZgYkPnA)
            - This 8-minute video shows the dancer Miyoko Shida perform a meditative, almost magical, balancing act that requires total mindfulness.
- Lecture 6: Science and Spirituality
    - In two previous lectures we were presented with a scenario of the origin and evoloution of life on earth
        - It begins with the formation with membrane bounded oily droplets or bubbles in the primeval oceans. These lipids formed spontaneously in an appropriate soap and water environment according to the basic laws of physics. Once they had formed, a complex network of chemistry - "a network chemistry" - began in the interior of those tiny bubbles which provided them with the potential to grow and evolve into complex self replicating systems. Eventually life emerged from these protocells with the evolution of DNA proteins and the genetic code. This marked the emergence of a universal ancestor, the first bacterial cell from which all subsequent forms of life depended. The dependents of the first living cells took over the planet by weaving a bacterial planetary web and gradually occupying all the ecological niches. Driven by the creativity inherent in all living organisims the planetary web of life expanded through mutations, gene trading and symbiosis - producing forms of life of ever increasing complexity and diversity. In this majestic unfolding of life, living organisims continually responded to disturbances from the environment in autonomous ways with structural changes. They did so according to their own natures, and from the beginning of life their interactions with one another were cognitive interactions. And as their structures evolved and became more and more complex, so the process of cognition became more complex, eventually bringing forth conscious awareness and conceptual thought!
    - Now when we look at this scenario from the formation of oily droplets to the emergence of consciousness language and thought the question arises, what about the human spirit? How does the human spirit fit into this picture, is there any room for it?
    - To answer this question (about the place of spirit), its useful to review the original meaning of the word spirit. 
        - Breath of life
            - Spiritus
            - Anima
            - Psyche
            - Atman
    - Since respiration is indeed a central aspect of the metabolism of all but the simplest organisms, the breath of life seems like the perfect metaphor for the network of metabolic processes that we have seen as the defining characteristics of life. 
    - Spirit - the breath of life - is what we all have in common. It nourishes and connects us with one another.
    - Spirituality is usually understood as a way of being that follows from a certain profound experience with reality. Often called a mystical, religious or spiritual experience. There are numerous descriptions of these experiences in the literature of the worlds religion, and they tend to agree that this is a direct non-intellectual experience of reality with some fundamental characteristics that are independent of the cultural and historical context. 
    - One of the most beautiful contemporary decriptions of spiritual experience can be found in an essay titled "spirituality as common sense" by the benedictine monk psychologist and author David Steindl-Rast.
    - in accordance with the original meaning of spirit as the breath of life, brother David characterises spiritual experience as moments of heightened aliveness. He says that our spiritual moments are the moments when we feel most strongly and intently alive
    - This aliveness when felt during such a peak experience involves not only the body but also the mind. Buddhists refer to this heightened mental alertness as mindfulness. And they emphasise that mindfulness is always grounded in the body, or embodied. So spiritual experience, is an experience of mind and body as a unity. 
    - Moreover this experience transcends not only the difference between "mind and body" but the "self and the world". The central awareness in those spiritual moments is an awareness that is a profound sense of oneness with all. A deep sense of belonging to the universe as a whole, which is fully borne out by the new systemic conception of life.
    - As we understand how the roots of life reach deep into basic physics and chemistry how the unfolding of complexity began long before the formation of the first living cells. And how life has evolved for billions of years by repeatedly using the same patterns of organisation, we realise how tightly we are connected to the entire fabric of life
    - When we discuss the relationship between science and spirituality, **it's very important to distinguish between spirituality and religion.** There has been a lot of confusion in these discussions because people fail to make this distinction!
        - Spirituality is a way of being grounded in a certain experience of reality that is independent of cultural and historical contexts
        - Religion is the organised attempt to understand spiritual experience to interpret it with words and concepts, and to use this interpretation as moral or ethical guidelines for the religious community
    - Religion 
        - Three basic aspects
            - All three depend on the communities historical and cultural context. 
            - Theology
                - Intellectual interpretation of the spiritual experience, of the sense of belonging with god as the ultimate reference point.
                    - Theology was originally understood as the theoretical interpretation of the theologians own mystical experience. When you look at the history of christianity, during the first 1000 years; virtually all leading theologians - the church fathers - were mystics who used theology as interpretations of their mystical experience. 
                    - Then over the subsequent centuries, especially during the middle ages in the scholastic period, theology became progressively fragmented and divorced from the original spiritual experience. 
                    - With the new emphasis on purely intellectual theological knowledge and arguments about how to best formulate this knowledge came a hardening of the language. Where as the church fathers repeatedly asserted that religious experience cannot be adequately expressed in words, as did spiritual teachers in all other traditions and therefore expressed their interpretations in forms of symbols, poetic language and metaphors. 
                    - The scholastic theologians formulated christian teachings in ridged dogmatic language and required from the faithful to accept this language - otherwise branded and punished as heretics.
                    - In other words christian theology became more and more rigid and fundamentalist devoid of authentic spirituality. 
                    - The difference between these subtle relationships between spirituality and religion will be important when we compare both with science
                        - Scientists and spiritual teachers have different purposes. As scientists we try to explain natural phenomena, while the purpose of a spiritual discipline is not to provide a description of the world... but to facilitate experiences that will change a persons life, values and sense of self. 
                        - However, in their interpretations of their experiences, mystics and spiritual teachers are often led to make statements about the nature of the world and the nature of human consciousness; and this allows us to compare their descriptions of reality with corresponding descriptions from scientists 
                        - Now in these spiritual teachings, e.g. Bhuddism, the mystical experience is always primary. Its descriptions and interpretations are seen as secondary, tentative and insufficient to describe the essence of the spiritual experience!
                        - These descriptions from spiritual teachers are not unlike our scientific models and theories, which as we have learned are also always limited and approximate. 
                        - In the history of Christianity by contrast, theological statements about the nature of the world, human nature etc. was taken as the literal truth and any attempt to question them was condemned and this rigid position of the church led to the conflicts between science and fundamentalist christianity; from Giordano Bruno and Galileo, on to the present day.
                        - Spiritual experience
                            - A direct non-intellectual experience of reality in moments of heightened aliveness which is known as a mystical experience because it's an encounter with the mysterious and unknown.
                            - Spiritual teachers throughout the ages have insisted that this experience of this profound connectedness and oneness with the universe and belonging to the cosmos as a whole (central aspect of mystical experience) - is ultimately  ineffable that is impossible to describe in words or concepts. So they often describe its as being accompanied by a great sense of awe and wonder, together with a feeling of great humility.
                            - In science, our systematic observations of the world, are not deemed to be ineffable - in fact the contrary. We try to describe them as precisely as possible using technical and mathematical language and so on...
                            - However the fundamental interconnectedness of all phenomena is a dominant theme also in modern science, and many of our great scientists have expressed their sense of awe and wonder when faced with the mystery that lies beyond the limits of their scientific theories. 
                            - Albert Einstein for one, repeatedly expressed these feelings as for example in this well known and celebrated passage:
                                - The fairest thing we can experience is the mysterious. It is the fundamental emotion which stands at the cradle of true art and science... the mystery of the eternity of life, and the inkling of the marvellous structure of reality, together with the single hearted-endeavour to comprehend a portion, be it ever so tiny.
                                - Humbleness, awe and wonder!
                            - In Theistic religions, the encounter with mystery is an encounter with god. Mystery, is associated with the divine
                            - The early christian mystics repeatedly emphasised that the experience of god, transcends all words and concepts. 
                                - An influential mystic in the early 6th(1st?) Century known as [[Dionysius the Areopagite]] who is quoted to have said:
                                    - "At the end of all our knowing, we shall know god as the unknown."
                                - Similarly [[Saint John of Damascus]] wrote
                                    -  "God is above all knowing and above all essence"
                                - Never the less, they often wanted to speak of god despite proclaiming it unspeakable. They were well aware the mystery of the divine could not be encompassed by words and factual language. So the Church fathers used poetic language which was much more multi-dimensional, as well as symbols which is why art in Christianity was so important - be it music, painting or archetecture or other forms
                            - The central arrow of theologians in subsequent centuries was and is to adopt a literal interpretation of these metaphors.
                                - Once this was done however, any dialogue between science and religion becomes frustrating and unproductive. 
                                - In fairness, fundamentalism exists not only in religion but also in science.
                                    - Ask a scientist if their theory is tentative and approximate and they will say of course, however they often will continue to act as if it was a fact/dogma... just a different god...
            - Morals
                - The rules of conduct derived from that sense of belonging which lies at the core of the spiritual experience
                    - Ethical behaviour is always related to the particular community in which we are involved. It is behaviour for the common good. 
                    - Looking at todays world we belong to many communities but all share at least two in which we belong; humanity and the global biosphere.
                    - We are members of Oikos ("the earth household" - the root of the greek ecology/economy). And as members of the household, we should behave like the other members of the household - the plants, animals, micro-organisms which form the vast network of relationships we call the web of life!
                    - The outstanding characteristic of the biosphere is its inherent ability to sustain life.  As members of the global community of living beings, it behooves us to behave in such a way that we do not interfere with natures inherent ability to sustain life. This is the essence of ecological sustainability.
                    - As members of the human community, our behaviour should reflect a respect of human dignity and basic human rights. 
                    - Since human rights encompasses biological, cognitive and social dimensions; human rights should be respected in all three of these dimensions.
                    - To lay this out in detail is quite a challenge but fortunately we have a magnificent document that covers a broad range of human dignity and human rights. This document is called [[The Earth Charter]] 
                        - [[The Earth Charter]] was written over many years starting with The Earth summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and over the subsequent years in a unique collaborative effort - with many many groups NGOs, Indigenous people and other groups around the world. Its a declaration of 16 values and principals for building a sustainable, just and peaceful world. It was finished in 2000 and is still valid today, a magnificent summary of the kind of ethics we need in todyas world.
            - Ritual
                - The celebration of belonging, the celebration of the experience but also the community.
                - The original purpose of religious communities was to provide members an opportunity to relive the religious/spiritual experience of their founders; and for this purpose religious leaders designed special rituals within their historical and cultural context.
                - Rituals are very different in religions across the world. They may involve special places, robes, music, dance, psychedelics, ritualistic objects.
                - In many religions, these special means to facilitate religious experience become closely associated with the religion itself and are considered sacred. 
                - We speak of sacred sites; the sacred geometry of [Sharpel Cathedral](https://arundelcathedral.uk/john-sharples) for instance. We speak about sacred dances, sacred/holy water, sacred mushrooms - all kinds of means to facilitate religious experience 
    - Having now sufficiently established the proper framework to discern the difference between religion and spirituality, we can discuss science and spirituality.
    - As mentioned, scientists and spiritual teachers pursue very different goals; while the purpose of the scientist is to find explanations of natural phenomena, that of spiritual traditions is to change a persons self and way of life.
    - However in the different pursuits both discipline are led to make statements about the nature of reality - and that we can compare
    - Among the first modern scientist to make such comparisons were leading physicists of the 20th century who have struggled to understand the strange and unexpected reality of atomic phenomena in the 1920 which challenged the very abilities of understanding of language and concepts 
    - In the 1950's several of these leading quantum physicists published popular books about the philosophy and history of quantum physics and in those books they often hinted at remarkable parallels between the world view implied by modern physics and the views of eastern spiritual traditions.
        - Three quotations
            - [[Robert Oppenheimer]] (1954)
                - The general notions about human understanding... which are illustrated by discoveries in atomic physics, are not in the nature of things wholly unfamiliar, wholly unheard of, or new. Even in our own culture they have a history, and in Buddhist and Hindu thought a more considerable and central place. [[Quotes]]
            - [[Neils Bhor]] (1958)
                - For a parallel to the lesson of atomic theory [we must turn] to those kinds of epistemological problems with which already thinkers like the Buddha and Lao Tzu have been confronted. [[Quotes]]
            - [[Werner Heisenberg]] (1958)
                - The great scientific cotribution in theoretical physics that has come from Japan since the last war may be an indication of a certain relationship between the philosophical ideas in the tradition of the far east and the philosophical substance of quantum theory. [[Quotes]]
    - During the 1960s about 10 years after these books were published there was a strong interest in eastern spiritual traditions in Europe and North America and many scholarly books on Hindusim, Buddhism and DAOism were published by Eastern and Western authors along with many popular books.
    - At that time the parallels between these eastern traditions and modern physics were discussed more frequently. 
    - In the 1975 Capra was amongst the first to systematically explore the parallels between modern physics and eastern traditions in his book The TAO of Physics.
        - Thesis: The seemingly differentiated approaches of physicists and mystics share some important characteristics. Their methods are both thoroughly empirical; physicists derive their knowledge from experiments, mystics from meditative insights. Both are observations. In both fields these observations are acknowledged as the only source of knowledge. 
        - The objects of observation are obviously very different. 
            - The Mystic looks within and explores his or her consciousness at various levels including the physical phenomena associated with the minds embodiment.
            - Physicists by contrast begin their enquirery into the essential nature of things by studying the material world, exploring ever deeper realms of matter they realise that they themselves and their consciousness are an integral part of this unity. 
            - So thus the mystic and the physicist arrive at the same conclusion - one starting form the inner realm, and the other from the outer world. The harmony between their views are a beautiful confirmation of the ancient indian wisdom that Brahmin (the ultimate reality without) is the same as Atman (the reality within)
            - A further important similarity between the way of the physicist and the mystic is that their observations take place in realms that are in accessible to the ordinary senses. In modern physics these are the atomic and subatomic world.
                - If you want to do some research to find a trace of the Higgs boson you need 5-10 years study to become an experimental physicist with knowledge of the theoretical frameworks and tools used in Cern. 
                - If you want to a mystic and study altered states of consciousness its the same things; meditations and spiritual discipline for years and years and years
                - Neither has guaranteed results but you need the discipline to get to the point just to ask the question!
            - So these are non ordinary states of consciousness in which the everyday sensory world is transcended; either in physics going to the realms of the very small or in meditation going to different states of consciousness. It needs in both cases long years of training and in both fields the experts will tell you their observations often defy ordinary language and concepts!
            - After the publication of the DAO of physics numerous books appeared presenting the parallels of physics and mysticism. Other authors extended the  inquiries beyond physics finding similarities between traditions and certain ideas in western science about free will, death and birth, the nature of life, mind and consciousness, and so on.
            - These kinds of parallels have also been drawn between modern science and western spiritual traditions. In fact some of these explorations were initiated by eastern spiritual teachers. 
                - The Dalai Lama in particular hosted a whole series of dialogs with western scientists and is still hosting them in his home town in exile in Dharamshala called dialogs on mind and life.
            - All these extended explorations on the relationships between science and spirituality over the past three decades or so have made it evident that the sense of oneness which is a key characteristic of spiritual experience is fully confirmed by the understanding of reality in contemporary science. Therefore there are numerous similarities between the world views of mystics/spiritual teachers both eastern/western and the systemic conception of nature thats now being developed across several scientific disciplines 
            - This awareness of being connected is especially strong in science in ecology. Connectedness, relationships and interdependence/belonging are key concepts of ecology, while also at the centre of spiritual experience.
                - Therefore Ecology (especially the philosophical school of deep ecology) may be an ideal bridge between science and spirituality. 
            - When we look at the world around us, we find that we are not thrown into random events - into chaos - but rather that we are a part of a great order or grand symphony of life.  Every molecule in our body was once part of a different body, either living or non living, and will become part of a different body in the future. And in this way our body will not die but live on because life itself lives on. 
            - Moreover, we do not share only the molecules of life but also the basic patterns of organisation of life with all the living world. So indeed we are intimately interwoven with the whole fabric of life, we belong to the universe and this experience of belonging can make our lives profoundly meaningful - this is where modern science and spirituality meet!
