---
Tags: [Course]
---

# Capra Course L3 


- [Link](https://spring.capracourse.net/lessons/lecture-3-order-complexity-living-world-2/) 
    - Summary
        - In Lectures 3 and 4, I apply the systemic perspective to the understanding of the origin and evolution of life. To do so, we need to shift to a different level of description. The theory of autopoiesis defines life as a particular pattern of organization — a self-generating network within a boundary of its own making — but it does not give us a detailed description of the processes that occur within this self-generating network in terms of physics, chemistry, and genetics. This level of description is necessary to understand the evolution and the origin of life.
        - Today, there is a broad consensus among biologists that long before the emergence of the first living cell there was a type of molecular evolution, also known as "prebiotic" evolution, in which the transition from nonliving to living matter was brought about by a gradual and spontaneous increase of molecular complexity.
        - At first glance, this seems to be in contradiction with the second law of thermodynamics, but there are in fact quite a few processes in nature where there is a spontaneous increase of molecular complexity without any violation thermodynamics.****
        - These processes are known as "self-organization," because the resulting structures are organized by the "internal rules" of the system, not by anything outside. A simple and well-known example is the formation of soap bubbles when you shake a mixture of soap and water. The resulting structures form spontaneously because they are thermodynamically more stable than the original ingredients. __(Section 8.1)__
        - There are many such examples, which are well known to all chemists. They are known as static self-organization, because once the self-organization has taken place — once the bubbles have formed — the structure does not change anymore; there is chemical equilibrium. For the systems view of life, the much more interesting examples of self-organization are what is called dynamic self-organization. Their key characteristic is that these systems operate far from chemical equilibrium. Ilya Prigogine called them "dissipative structures" to indicate that they are stable but also change all the time. A water vortex is a simple example of a dissipative structure. Water particles flow through it continuously, yet the overall structure remains stable. Metaphorically, we can also visualize a cell as a whirlpool — a stable structure with matter and energy continually flowing through it.** **__(Section 8.3)__
        - Prigogine’s critical insight was that systems operating far from equilibrium need to be described in terms of nonlinear equations. Therefore, the formalism of nonlinear dynamics, or complexity theory, became very important for him. He used this new mathematics to formulate a nonlinear thermodynamics of dissipative structures, for which he was awarded the Nobel prize.
        - To conclude this lecture, I discuss what is perhaps the most important discovery in the theory of dissipative structures and, in my view, the most important discovery in complexity theory. The dynamics of dissipative structures specifically include the spontaneous emergence of new forms of order. When the energy of the flow increases, it may happen that the system as a whole encounters a point of instability, known technically as a "bifurcation point," where it can branch off, or “bifurcate,” into an entirely new state. __(Section 8.2)__
        - This spontaneous emergence of new order at critical points of instability, which is nowadays often referred to just as “emergence,” is the key characteristic of dynamic self-organization, and is in fact one of the hallmarks of life. It has been recognized as the underlying dynamic of development, of learning, and of evolution. In other words, creativity — the generation of new forms of order — is a key property of all living systems. Nature always reaches out into new territory to create novelty.
        - The detailed theory of emergence shows that the instabilities and sudden jumps to new forms of order are the result of small fluctuations that are amplified by feedback loops, until the system as a whole becomes unstable. When that happens, it may fall apart because of the instability, but much more frequently it will not break down but break through to a new state of order.
        - The process of emergence has happened in evolution from the beginning of life. All the structures that were created in this way are all so-called “emergent structures.”
        - In fact, biological life itself is the ultimate emergent structure. None of the basic constituents of a living cell are alive by themselves. But when they all came together in a particular pattern of organization, billions of years ago, life emerged and has continued to unfold, producing countless new emergent structures. This continual unfolding of life — in other words, evolution — is the subject of the following lecture.
    - Key concepts
        - Membrane, cellular
            - The semi-permeable boundary of a cell, which regulates the cell’s molecular composition and thus preserves its identity
        - Structural determinism
            - In the theory of autopoiesis, the idea that the behavior of a living organism is determined by its structure, which itself is the result of previous structural changes
        - Self-organization
            - A set of processes that generate structures organized by the “internal rules” of a system, rather than by external, imposing forces
        - Bifurcation point
            - A point of instability, characteristic of nonlinear systems, at which the system may branch off into a new state where new structures and new forms of order may emerge; see also: emergence
        - Emergent property
            - Property of a system that emerges at a certain level of complexity but does not exist at lower levels; property created in the process of emergence
        - Far from equilibrium (equilibrium, far from)
            - In thermodynamics, a type of dynamic balance in which the state of a system is continually changing, due to flows of energy and matter through the system; see also: dissipative structure
        - Open system (system, open)
            - A system (such as a water vortex or a living system) that depends on continual flows of matter and energy to maintain itself (or to stay alive); see also: dissipative structure
        - Dissipative structure
            - An open system that maintains itself in a state far from equilibrium, and yet is stable, the same overall structure being maintained in spite of an ongoing flow and change of components
    - Supplementary materials
        - [Emergence by Brian Goodwin](https://youtu.be/055WAeu7Mh0)
            - Brian Goodwin was a biologist, mathematician, and complexity theorist who taught at Schumacher College, where this short video clip (4 min) was filmed. He had a great influence on my thinking, and the video perfectly captures his lively and original way of presenting scientific ideas.
        - [Self organisation in a flock of starlings](https://youtu.be/eakKfY5aHmY)
            - Self-organization can be observed not only in cells and multicellular organisms, but also in animal societies. In this beautiful short video (4 min) you see thousands of starlings flying in tight flocks known as “murmurations.” When you watch these dazzling clouds of birds — swirling, contracting, rotating, expanding —you cannot help feeling that you are watching some kind of super organism. Many birds fly in flocks, but starlings are unique in their fluidity of motion. Video analyses and computer modeling have shown that each bird almost instantly coordinates its movements with its seven nearest neighbors. Nobody leads the flock. It is a magnificent example of self-organization.
    - [Forum](https://spring.capracourse.net/forums/forum/lecture-03-discussion-order-and-complexity-in-the-living-world/)
- Order and Complexity in the Living World
    - In the previous lecture we discussed the systemic conception of life in terms of self generating autopoietic networks
    - In this lecture we will apply the same systemic perception to the understanding of the origins and evolution of life. To do this we will shift to a differnt level of description
    - Autopoiesis describes and defines life in relation to a particular pattern; a self generating network within a boundary of its own making. This does not give us detailed descriptions of the chemical processes occuring within this self generating network to a level where we can understand cellular metabolism.
    - Today there is a broad consensus amongst biologists that long before the emergence of the first living cel there was a type of molecular evolution also known as prebiotic evolution in which the transition from non living to living matter was brought about by a gradual and spontaneous increase in molecular complexity. 
    - At first glance this would seem at odds with the second law of thermodynamics which says that physical systems go from order to disorder. However there are a few cases in nature that go from order to increasing complexity without violating the second law of thermodynamics. This is called Self-organisation (although there are a bunch of definitions which can confuse matters)
    - The idea of molecular evoloution was stated boldly in the 20's by Alexander Oparin - Prebiotic Evoloution. 
    - Todays self-organisation refers to structures organised by the "internal rules of the system".
    - Beginning with molecular self-organisation examples; many of which show us processes that occur spontaneously because the structure thats formed is thermodynamically more favourable/stable than its initial components 
        - **Lipids**
            - Hydrophilic head - water loving
            - Hydrophobic tails - water hating
        - When these lipids come into contact with water the heads point towards the water and the tails point away from water. In doing so they spontaneously form a variety of structures, for example they may form a mono molecular film on the surface of water. When theres a motion in the water they can also form droplets and bubbles. (Micelles)
        - They can coat water droplets and keep them suspended in oil (CMC Hydrophobic compartment) 
        - They can coat oil droplets and keep the suspended in water (CAC water compartment). 
        - In each case the head will turn towards the water and the tail towards the oil
        - This happens because of the chemistry; it's more stable this way than as a random distribution of lipids. 
        - Lipids may form a more complex double layer of molecules with water on both sides with other substances or oil in the middle. This bilayer of lipids may form a bubble/sphere which are known by chemists as Vesicle's. This is a double layered greasy membrane that show surprising similarity with them more complex membranes we find in cells
        - For example they restrict the number and type of molecules that can enter the vesicle. They can also capture sunlight and transform it into electrical energy. They may collect various compounds within the structure and seem like the forerunners of todays cellular membranes (which combine the lipid structure with various proteins inserted for more complex functions).
        - These properties of the lipids/proto-membranes are so astonishing it's important to remember that they occur following simple laws of chemistry in agreement with thermodynamics. E.g. soap and water shaken to make bubbles - a very simple example of molecular self organisation.
        - These principals of organisation in lipids can also be observed in more complex structures such as the folding of proteins. This happens according to the amino acids acting as 'rules' and the resulting structure - the folded fully functioning protein is more stable than the elongated string of amino acids
        - This is a good example of a complex biochemical self organisation. Otherwise known by chemists as static self-organisation (the structure doesn't change once it reaches chemical equilibrium).
        - From the systems view of life, the more interesting form of self organisation are dynamic self organisations. **The key characteristic is that they operate far from equilibrium**. This is interesting because it's closely associated with the process of metabolism (which is maintained by a constant flow and thus operating far from equilibrium )
        - From antiquity, living organisms in many mysterious ways have always combined the stability of structure with the fluidity of change. See DaVinci 
        - In the 1940's **Ludwig von Bertalanffy** the founder of general systems theory called such structures "open systems" as they were always open to the flow of energy and matter. He coined the german term "Fliessgleichgewicht" which means "flowing balance". This term expresses the coexistence of balance and flow of structure and change. 
        - Bertalanffy didn't have the maths to describe these systems and the discipline had to wait 30 years until complexity theory was developed by **[[Ilya Prigogine]]** who's starting point was to recognise that all cellular structures exist far from equilibrium. 
        - He realised that cellular structures would soon decay towards an equilibrium state because within the cell structures dissipation and other reactions would dissipate according to thermodynamics. Equilibrium would thus equal death.
        - A cell thus needs a continual flow of energy to restore structures as fast as its decaying. Hence the term "open system". 
        - The critical insight for Prigogine was that open systems need to be described in terms of non-linear equations. Therefore the formulasim of non-linear dynamics aka Complexity theory thus became very important for him.
        - **Two levels of description; networks and flows**
            - In previous years when systems thinking originated there was a lot of discussion and controversy around whether they were open or closed. They Cyberneticists said they were closed because they are networks. Then Maturana and co. said they are autopoietic and they create their own boundry, at the same time Bertalanffy said they were open because of the continuous flow... **it turns out they are both!**
            - Today we say they are closed organisationally but they are open in terms of flows of energy and matter. 
            - They haven't yet been fully integrated (bar Fritjofs synthesis)
        - Like Bertalanffy who coined the term "flowing balance". Prigogine coined the term **"dissipative structures"** as a synthesis of dissipation and structure. Meaning they are stable but change all the time.
        - **Dissipative structures** according to Prigogine is "an open system that maintains itself in a state far from equilibrium, and yet is stable". i.e. the same overall structure is maintained despite ongoing flows and change.
            - Dissipative structures are not limited to living systems, there are simpler structures for example the water vortex which will maintain itself.
            - Metaphorically we can visualise a cell as a whirlpool but with more complex biochemical processes. 
        - The perhaps most important discovery in dissipative structures and perhaps even in complexity theory;** they dynamics of dissipative structures specifically include the spontaneous emergence of new forms of order.** When the energy of the flow increases it may happen that the systems as a whole may encounter a point of instability, technically known as a bifocation point, where it can branch off or bifocate into an entirely new state. 
        - This spontaneous emergence of new order at critical points of instability, which is nowadays often just referred to as emergence, is the key characteristic of dynamic self organisation and is in fact one of the hall marks of life. It has been recognised as the underlying dynamics of development, learning and evolution; **in other words - creativity!**
        - The generation of new forms of order, new structures, new behaviour. Creativity appears as a key property of all living systems, inherent in all life. Its not just artists, writers and philosophers - our cats, animals and plants are creative too! **Its inherent in the fabric of life**
        - 23min
        - Since they dynamics of this emergence requires open systems, we learn that open systems are creative and have a tendency to evolve. Nature always reaches out into new territory to create novelty.
        - The detailed theory of emergence shows that the instabilities and sudden jumps to new forms of order and organisation come from small fluctions that are amplified by feedback loops (positive/negative). Positive is self amplifying
        - In every living organism/system there are multiple feedback loops which fluctuate and circulate until the system as a whole becomes unstable. When this happens it may fall apart and breakdown because of the instability but much more often it breaks through to a new state of order!
        - In order to understand this phenomena in detail, Prigogine did not study living systems (he never did), but was inspired by the nature of life to understand the underlying dynamics of self organisation and emergence. He studied special chemical systems that exist far from equilibrium known as chemical clocks. They are special chemical oscillations that are quite remarkable. When certain substances are mixed into water with constant motion the system will oscillate between colours. Others produce waves of patterns. 
        - These were discovered in the 50's by [[Boris Belousov]] and [[Anatoly Zhabotinsky]] and this type of reaction is now know as the Belousov Zhabotinsky reaction - otherwise known as the BZ Reaction.
        - Prigogine recognised that to change colour all at once, or produce these patterns, the chemical system has to act as a whole producing a high degree of order through the coherent activity of billions of molecules 
        - Prigogine and his colleagues discovered that this coherent self organising behaviour emerges spontaneously at critical points of instability. Prigogine actually developed a whole non equilibrium thermodynamics to describe these processes and got the nobel prize. 
        - From another frame we might think about the emergence of a new idea; your working on a problem but dont know how to solve it by collecting lots of information and end up totally confused. In the beginning you may have hand an idea of where the solution my lie but having read so much etc you just dont know anymore so you just give up and take a moment of relaxation. Within this moment poof a solution! Your unconscious continued to work on putting together the patterns. A sudden insight after a stage of confusion. 
        - This process happens throughout life and all the structures that were created in evolution emerged at some point in evolutionary history. So they are called emergent structures.
        - Until the evolution of human beings and the great apes, the only structures in nature were emergent structures. But with the emergence of human consciousness, language, conceptual thought, strategies, design - it was possible to plan and design structures, but this is not so dissimilar as emergence is still at the basis of ideas and thus structures etc.
        - We should remember that biological life is the ultimate emergant structure as none of the basic constituituents of a living cell - the DNA, proteins, membranes etc. are alive by themselves. But when they all came together in a particular pattern of organisation billions of years ago, life emerged producing and has continued to unfold producing countless new emergent structures.
        - This continual unfolding of life, in other words evolution, is the subject of the next lecture.
- **A note from the forum on quality/quantity**
    - What complexity theory has taught us is that quantitative predictions are no longer possible with nonlinear systems. However, qualitative predictions are still possible. Nonlinear systems are represented mathematically by the so-called “attractors” and by fractals, which give us information about the general nature of the system’s dynamics without being able to predict in exactly what state the system will be at a particular time.
