---
Tags: [Calls]
---
Related:
# 2022-23-05 Assimilation

Hey folks, this is an activity report on activities at Regens Unite. There were a number of potentialities present for me that I'd like to share in hopes of being helpful. 

### **Small holder lending and valuechain**

Gabriella from EthicHub is doing a fantastic job on the ground helping smallholders earn a dignifieid living in Mexico. It felt like there was strong parallels with the work Gijs is focused on. They take crypto investment into a microlending product which is backed by commodities (coffee) in local cooperatives. The cooperatives convert the crypto investments into local currencies on behalf of their stakeholders and provide loans to enable dignified living resulting in higher quality products. The default rate is below 2% so the system is viable and vivifying for all participants. 

Jordi from EthicHub is more focused on methodology development for monitoring verification and reporting (if I remember correctly), which is probably more relevant to Rebecca and Austin via the registry initiative. 

The synnergy between EthicHub and Regen feels like a perfect fit; Regen is a level of abstraction higher than EthicHub but would encapsulate their specific instantiation very well. They currently run on Gnosis chain but my sense is that an upgrade is desirable and that they would be interested to get out of Ethereum due to the gas prices and necessary hacks.

### **Facillitation**

There were a lot of facillitators here (70%) but very few really stood out to me as pure talent. 

Among the ones that did I felt Ruby's embodied feminist take was exceptional and participated in her circular blueprint workshop which paid hommage to the rythms of nature and our embedding in them. This workshop was experential and deliberatly said very little, inviting participants to move around the seasons and feel into our relationship with their energies. I personally found it very cathartic recognising myself most at home in the winter and autum while many others preferred the energy of spring and summer. There were some exceptionally strong emotional responses to this workshop as people got out of their heads and into themselves. I can see Ruby as a key player in the wider ecosystem if the community pool discussions go wide, but would in the meantime suggest Nena and Revathi say hello before the connection decays. 

Another workshop I attended was the Glassbead Game which facillitated by Laurence. This was INCREDIBLE and tappaed capacities I didn't know I had (yet always desired). It was a deeply integrative ritual based on a 'propolis' of deep connection with other through concentration, contemplation and meditation. This was a vehicle to align on words, wisdom and understanding of a given subject - in this case the subject matter of 'Regeneration' and what it meant. When demonstarting the game (with myself as partner) we errupted into ten minuites of intensely improvised 'slam poetry'. I've always aspired towards such fluid linguistic flow but the capability remained dormant until this moment; I can honestly say that this workshop was a peak experience for me (the rarity and intensity of the moment was verified by others participating)... My sense here is that Laurence is NOT interested in the community pool or facillitation but may participate in activities if invited to. However there are other more important connections to the Science Team around interface design. 

Due to the above engagement, I sadly did not attend Ted Raus conversation on methodologies but caught up with him a bit later. As such I don't have much to say here but captured the sessions output. My sense is that this is a good connection for Rebecca and OpenTEAM (who Ted did some work for previously). I liked his passive and low key energy; he was cautious where he was spending it but was working quietly behind the curtain for the benefit of the organisation team. While I didn't see or hear much of his college, she seemed to have a pretty radient and aware energy. My assessment is that they could benefit openTEAM further via the commission produced form their csDAO as well as the wider ecosystem via commonwealth or the community service center. There was professionalism here.

The Regens Unite organising team felt very dedicated; while IMO they were not particularly talented facillitators they were however commited and mindful of inclusivity though the consensus plenary sessions were for my tases rather prescriptive and felt like a school assembly. However, as far as these go they made use of appropriate tooling like liberating structures other practices found amongst the extinction rebellion "anarchists". When I got into discussion I found Leen had an open, playful and inquiring energy to her and while the school vibes seemed a little sheltered from lifestyle hardships she was certainly engaged and learning about them from the more hardcore on their team like Xavier. Jeremy I already know, he's a capable facillitator (though too corporate for my tasets) and Anne-Marie seemed incredibly dedicated at the expense of herself. All in all the organising team felt like a good foundation or anchor from which more experienced folk like Ted and Ruby could heard cats into more effectual paradigm changes. I'd suggest Austin consider them for enDAOment before the lack of resources tears the team apart (which is a risk regardless), an alternative pathway to people that is perhaps less risky might be to consider the space instead its a bit run down but Citizens Corner hosts refugees, community crypto gatherings and provides a kitchen - a little could go a long way here and this is a pretty degenerated regenerative hub.


### **Politics, growth, fundraising**

Andrea from ATLAS shone for me as a potential candidate for our director of development. He has all the biases playing for him but seemed gentle aware and effectual. They have managed to get bills through european parliment and regularly tread between the worlds of crypto and institutions while organising movements. This politician wasn't pushing his agenda either which I appreciated, but it leaves me with a lack of propaganda to pass on. I'd suggest that Revs, Will and Austin have an introductory call. 


### **Interface Design**
A few cats here; Mixel, Hereward and Laurence (again).

Mixel is working on AI in relation to creativity as part of his phd. His views made a lot of sense to me fitting nicely into my own epistemology but its a long complex discussion to go into but to give a flavour here are some key terms that can be put into tetrads: Creation systems = anticipation, associations, drivers and action. Zooming into the action node you get the terms knowlege, strategy management, methdology/process, management of research and development management/science in action... this is condensing a phd of work into keywords and I'm not the author - probably good for Revathi to have a chat with him. I'd also suggest Ned, Rebecca and perhaps Will given the deSci movements happening at RND.

Laurence has been builng a 'wisdom commons' which really goes far beyond anything we've talked about thus far. He's been developing it with a single dev on a grant from Eric Hauris Brown thats about to run out. It's fully modular in design and includes many kinds of mapping features as well as modes of interaction (e.g. audio clips). The best I can describe whats happening there in a familliar sense is a Hylo compliment on steroids, I intend to get much more familliar with his work there and can see it tying in with Gisel and the intefrace team as its extreamly multi-perspective technology (probably inclusive of semantic translation due to connections with Nicholas Luck and co.). 

Hereward is working on ReFi spring and I actually met him through Nenas trip to the Crypto Commons hub. There's personal connections between us via Roberto/Liminal Village as well given he's in Boloniga Italy (perhaps via Oli Beam Mackintosh as well as they seemed similar in charater and Olis boyfriend is based in the same location... inference that I never checked.) Still, he's organising people for ReFi Spring via an events platform that seems to be better than Dandelion.earth (my previouls favourite signalling platform). The exact name escapes me but the interface is beautifully clean and minimalistic with integrated crypto payments. My suggestion is that Nena maintains the relationship she started building with him at the CC hub and I'll gradually get to know Hereward better via tangental connections. The interface team might be worth tying in on this one but the platforms perhaps too specific for their needs? 