- New Humanity: Started with fixed beliefs and moved to principals. Moved to allowing for human fallacies as part of the process
- Rights of nature: life has inherent rights just like humans and corporations. Rather than defined as property. Is rights a paradox from a eurocentric conception of law. Relationship based jurisprudence as a way to go longer term than rights.
- Without rights theres no symmetry of relationship
- Revs: this is a start towars nature having a voice; what is the vision and what examples come to mind as a sucessful approach?
- Salvidor: Nature is a sacred temple and we're behaving like the market in the temple. 
- Gregory: Ecudorian mining contract removed. National level court revoked an extractive industries rights based on the rights of nature in a place. This may shape global economies. Constitutional framework. May be able to weave the qualitive into the quantitive by through debt to nature. 
	- Is this just anthropocentric. Does this matter? not so much to me. Its probably self evident that theres a spiritual thing behind this but theres taught law, constitutional law, common law. if we include a line in here that allows a community to sue on behalf of nature its a pretty good start. Useful tool but doesnt reconcile the spiritual aspect of non-duality.
- Austin: Brings up some philosophical and spiritual conviction that can be at odds with very practical immediate things we can do to be effective. Of many minds. A claues or two can bring a lot of capacity that seems worth while (functional).
- Grant Wilson: agree with gregory, its huge that the court took away a goverment contract! Has the potential to be a paradigm change. Bubbling up all over the world. Chiles constitution has some rights of nature stuff getting voted on in September. Panama are trying to figure out rights of nature in panama, could connect to a financial system - rights to restoration.
	- Whats the paradigm? That nature has a right to restoration? 
- Nejma: capital impertant for communities to thrive imporant to explore the difference between community and ecasystem cognitive dissonance. The switch creates friction; accessibility and understandnig. Needs time and codesign to explore such viability. Allowing space and change to happen within them. Goinng back to philosophy (which we base our action on); theres already laws addressing rights of nature. Many of them are based on spiriual connection, really about symbiotic relationships between all beings and the health of diversity. What we see now in legal orders is devoid of this and is an exploration of restoration. Talking about virtuality (laws).
- Grant: portfolio.earth put out a report that the banks but in 2.6bl in things that go againts rights of nature in. Sucess will be limited under the curent financial system. Community empowerment and legal gaurdianship bodies... empowering communities where goverment has failed them. Refi = empowering communities through ecological assets. This may help communities work on behalf of ecosystems. Lots of bubbles rising to create systemic change, opportunity for lawyers and folks in the refi space to figure out the overlap
- Kirsten: how do we expand the spaces we are trynig to build and the aspirational principals of seeing earth as a partner. How do we as an org do this? Understanding that you cannot own the earth. FInancial system as engine driving the destruction. How do we redesign the system for the earth to own the earth (oxymoron). CLTs as vechicle. Using tokenomics to then give a collective ownership back to those in the network using tokens to build up assets. then comes the principals around regeneration and what it really means and the notion of receprocity in relationship with the earth so that we dont get into moralisation and step into relation, balance and respect. Reciprocity building with the earth. How do we listen to the earth? Indigenous work comes back in, earth wispering. Humans coming in and botching things before the earth comes in at a slower pace to clean up. Living in reverence, reciprocity, realation. Using the law to get to the appropriate place slowly. Business model is drawing on these principals of refi and tokenomics towards living on earth in a new way. 
- Nena: tax system. Imagine paying taxes to the maple trees for the services they provide. What if we look at paying nature for its services. Cognitive revolution, healing our relationship with our surroundings. Stuck in a loop. 
- Revs: Closing the circle the exciting opportunity is refi projects and the patters they are experimenting and being aware of our own anthropocentric nature, using decentralisation and its trustlessness nature to move towards a cognitive revolution. Are there other patterns that stand out?
- Marcus: what deos it mean to have trustless immutible blockchains as base layre; what does it mean for sucessful web3 and the larger memes?
- Gegory: from my perspective I think were starting to move in the right directions convo speaking: what are the tools that society needs to reconnect our political economy to the physical world? How dow we weave the economics and encode the rights in our legal system. Web3 is probbaly best thought of as applied technology suites towards the full digitalisation of our coordination systems. Most txs are digital and I think that will probably increase. What is the infrastructure we need to seamlessly integrate the voice/value of nature (dont like the duality). How do we bring it into our perception via legal systems and crypto systems? Rather than a reaction to the fed printing money. If your really aiming to build public infrastructure I think its important to approach from a first principals; transactions interactions usecases. Who are the stakeholders to engage with in codesign towards evolving the system? How do we connect humans and living systems towards securing the base layre and then the nesting. How do monitor verif the maple grove or amazon. Regeneration is local. The actions, connection and reconnection needs to be place based. Drives archetecture and culture. Reembedding living systems into society. 
- How do we redesign incentives to avoid extraction? Refi and new economic model. Noodling through as best we can. Gregores work with Ethan Roland on 8 forms of capital; expanding from financial to more complex forms of value. Ways to value relationships with nature and communities and embedding these into tokens. Perma gardens on a specific site increasing token value for all bringing value into the larger network. Collective wisdom via DAOs as a means to govern and then step back into the notion of sacred. Collectivly using DAO structures to make the decisions around how to reembed ourselves into the Gaia system. 
- Revs: greater than human systems it is then. Plug to continue conversations as a reading group together with the foundation. Looking at DAOs as a vehicle for community owned systems of change, inc greater than human systems. Parting thoughts?
- Grant: Questions to think about: who speaks for nature in web3? is it gaurdians? How do we pick them? is it AI? How does it measure? 
- Austin: finding common language is tough. Duality of using nature as a term that seperates us; living world suggested as alt term. Steering financial and legal infrastructures with intention. Plugging another pannel on ecofemenist practices for tomorrow. 
- Gregory: to grants great questions, the answer is yes! Each one of those will require a lot of care and thoughtfulness to figure out how and what the process is. Enliving and important edge of governance and attuning our society into the world. Thanks everyone. 
- Nejma: biomimicary and the human systems we run around in are very seperate form ecological systems and reality. What is the goal? how can the greater ecosystems become the foundation? Biomimicary and plurality. Would love to explore
- New Humanity: appreciate the conversation. Whats the final thing that wants to showe up. Key capacity being the ability to listenin order to bring the voice of earth to the table. Just listen. Earth wispering so we drop out of our brains and how we think 'it' needs to happen. 