---
Tags: []
---
Related: 
# 2022-05-31 Remediation

### Revathi Remediation Call
Culture clash last week... Team call it came up that the community service guild was going to take over the community service centre. Considering the folks at RND are not happy with the engagement so we have to proactivly remedy the differences we see. Would really ask me to take a step back according to stakeholders. 

Would like to know a summary of whats on my plate and moving things off it to put energy into this considering that the twitter space was a shame as I cant be facillitating the Twitter space. 

15 days notice of change of contract. Wrap up work. Think about what I wanna do as a community member and what I wanna do as a guild.

Will ask Nena to put together a notion space. Communicating to stakeholders as a means to make this happen. 

Find time to reflect with Tiffany in a safer space. Part of the concerns that the team has is a lot of the processes and proposals I made seemed that they were incoherent with what we were thinking. Dont understand the name CS centre, there wasnt internal consensus. 

When there is clear dissent its a clear signal that there is no consensus and will feel slow. Gijs has his issues in how he sees the world and there are issues there but no one else is as prominant in this way. 

Can we reflect? Practical mode, work on plate.

Hand off of partnerships / contacts over the next two weeks. Using the CRM by Austin / Gijs. Use it for documentating. Card for contact, speak to one person on the team and email an introduction. Revs, Nena, Austin as candidates to link up. Nena as CC for all to manage CRM

Share this update there.

List of tasks in the Governance Circle; audit them. 

A lot of the current narrative / frame has come from Revs and the Team. Would like to hear my side. 

Be mindful of work done in the foundation and keep it seperate. What would be a conflict of interest would be using materials and anything I did while renumerated by the foundation. DeSci would be a great pathway. 




