---
Tags: []
---
Related: 
# 2022-05-31 OpenTEAM

Digital green and oursci team missing

Last several calls based on identity services, revisiting mural board. Walking through inflection point, reaching inflection point to revisit consensus. Laying out where we go from here and the summer pattern. 

Updates and introductions. Some openTeam updates and then revisiting the concept note and next steps. Setting up work for the next six to eight weeks

Concept note: https://docs.google.com/document/d/19k1u2s81Dm4-3uowfnEBa_lpj0Loow-TfvNPQ8jW8Ek/edit?usp=sharing
https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO7uKWy8=/


Mike: moving data from form to lab with some big players. 
Rian: the new programme manager for openTEAM. Intersection of research and agriculture. 
David: product manager for the cofarm alliance and tour. Building bio char and feed additives for livestock and perennial crops above and below ground. Gonna be 18monts to complete. Moving GHG stuff to fall in line with COP. Getting Greg austic and others setup with API keys
Sienna: communications manager for open team. catching up. 
Marc: Startup in Cambodia on regenerative ag. Developing pilot on remote sensing and soil fertility. Building a results based methodology based on remote sensing. 
Steve Francis: Torrosso and tech matters. Landscape level coordination. launched 0.5 which allows folks to launch theri landscape. Simple mapping of data sets. 
Tim: Working on ecosystem services and natural capital, has a small farm. 
Dominic SV: Soil and water outcome fund. UI manager for their tool on open enrollment, across several states in the US
David Tapp: jsut switched roles; farmer success manager for lite farm. In the middle of insanity week for new release getting put out Friday or Saturday - french
Jeff Herrick USDA: UNCD - real convention. Representing the us at various spaces. Lots of need for open source tools and data. How you interact with it all. Land degradation is a real problem. John Maynard working with Greg to get the API setup on soil data. 
Daaboul Mayssam: interested in p2p decentralised collaborations. 
Michael: Were for land in montana, in the field rain land measurement with producer partners.


Wanted to update openTeam side:
- Mike working on modus work which intersects with Produ university Pretty oats center and farm foundation https://farmfoundation.swoogo.com/soilhealthtech
- Extending lab result data to farms. Linking with USDA to link up agendas and summer collabathons (use cases and demos for that event). Been searching for intersections with the Oats team. 
- Working with gateway and modus to link in orgs.
- Cooperative agreement with the USDA, finalised in the next month. bringing openTeam into USDA software.  
- Link on paper: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1uIld3Xqk6lxDyNILGzwA_Ut37D0Zu3zc/view?usp=sharing
- Coupl weeks ago there was a bill introduced into the senate to ammend food security act by modernising infracture and analysis: https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/senate-bill/4189/text?r=12&s=1
- In the coming weeks also working to update collabathon schedule in preparation for smart commodities proposals. Led a prop. Cosigned on several others and supporting the second round. 
- Picing up the elements that went into these topics and restructuring collabathons in preparation for funding that may have come through that round. 


Identity and oAuth: 
- unified user experience and challenges.
- Identity and data sharing as core conversation
- Centralised vs decentralisation
- Move forward now and recognise the emergence of decentralised tech.
- Rough consensus is to start centralised and create tech specific for openteam and agstack toolkits. Compatiblity structures. 
- Addressing the data storage decentralisation issues; loose coupling them. 
- Developing a project to continue engagement with decentral tech such as bluesky. Data schemas need consensus. Plan for transition to future archetectures.
- Generating use cases with openTeam community. Identifying core users and journies. Sketches for UI.
- Design doc in the works for agstack (linux foundation)

Next steps:
- how do we package the work into something that can be engaged with? Taking action and looking for feedback. synthesing the last set of conversations into a project plan document via all the feedback. 
- What are the key terms and definitions needed to engage new folk
- Laying out the objective the mapped user journies forward in more detail
- Thinknig that the user journey mapping process and what that looks like for our users and how that might intersect.
- Miro template to be filled out on our own and then invite folks back to share user experience intersections to provide a pathway for a design document we can move forward with.
- Looking towards two weeks, sharing a miro template to map at least one journey as a prototype process to walk through.
- Digital Green doing lots of work on decentralised approach following the conversations. May present next week. 

Jeff:  defined functions and milestones. 
Open Team: Are there key timeliens in our own dev that is key to know about. Maving forward with Agstack and Hylo use cases. 

Michael: commitment on feature stuff is hard without user cases. Balancing those with user work. Got ahead of ourselves. 6-8 weeks to get the journies together. 

Dorn: Wish I had the mapping to share. Will do next week as we come back. Whos up for signing up a user journey. 

Moving forward on user experience. Working towards what that looks like while otherthings happen in parallel. e.g. Digital Greens digital service. 

Nominations for key terms and definitions we may wish to include?
Must, should, may, could ala soverign. `data soverignity` `data portability` `digital equity`, data controller, data processer, data feduciary. 

Marc; move from language to pictures due to translation and scripts that are hard to read. 