---
Tags: [Person, Esoteric]
---
Related: [[Second Order Science]] [[Paradigm]] [[Paradigm Shift]] [[Principals]] [[Framework]]

# Thomas Kuhn

[Wikipedia Link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Kuhn)
> **Thomas Samuel Kuhn** ([/kuːn/](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:IPA/English); July 18, 1922 – June 17, 1996) was an American [philosopher of science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy_of_science) whose 1962 book __[The Structure of Scientific Revolutions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Structure_of_Scientific_Revolutions)__ was influential in both academic and popular circles, introducing the term __[paradigm shift](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradigm_shift)__, which has since become an English-language idiom.

> Kuhn made several claims concerning the progress of [scientific knowledge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_knowledge): that scientific fields undergo periodic "paradigm shifts" rather than solely progressing in a linear and continuous way, and that these paradigm shifts open up new approaches to understanding what scientists would never have considered valid before; and that the notion of scientific truth, at any given moment, cannot be established solely by [objective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Objectivity_(philosophy)) criteria but is defined by a consensus of a [scientific community](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sociology_of_scientific_knowledge). Competing paradigms are frequently [incommensurable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commensurability_(philosophy_of_science)); that is, they are competing and irreconcilable accounts of reality. Thus, our comprehension of science can never rely wholly upon "objectivity" alone. Science must account for subjective perspectives as well, since all objective conclusions are ultimately founded upon the subjective conditioning/worldview of its researchers and participants.

[Stanford link](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/thomas-kuhn/)
> According to Kuhn the development of a science is not uniform but has alternating ‘normal’ and ‘revolutionary’ (or ‘extraordinary’) phases. The revolutionary phases are not merely periods of accelerated progress, but differ qualitatively from normal science. Normal science does resemble the standard cumulative picture of scientific progress, on the surface at least. Kuhn describes normal science as ‘puzzle-solving’  

> On the one hand, positivists required of a science that it should be verifiable by reference to its predictive successes. On the other, Popper’s criterion was that a science should be potentially falsifiable by a prediction of the theory. Yet psychoanalysis, sociology and even economics have difficulty in making precise predictions at all, let alone ones that provide for clear confirmation or unambiguous refutation. Kuhn’s picture of a mature science as being dominated by a paradigm that generated sui generis puzzles and criteria for assessing solutions to them could much more easily accommodate these disciplines

> The Structure of Scientific Revolutions was an important stimulus to what has since become known as ‘Science Studies’, in particular the Sociology of Scientific Knowledge (SSK)

> Although Kuhn asserted a semantic incommensurability thesis in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions he did not there articulate or argue for the thesis in detail. This he attempted in subsequent work, with the result that the nature of the thesis changed over time. The heart of the incommensurability thesis after The Structure of Scientific Revolutions is the idea that certain kinds of translation are impossible. Early on Kuhn drew a parallel with Quine’s thesis of the indeterminacy of translation (1970a, 202; 1970c, 268). According to the latter, if we are translating one language into another, there are inevitably a multitude of ways of providing a translation that is adequate to the behaviour of the speakers. None of the translations is the uniquely correct one, and in Quine’s view there is no such thing as the meaning of the words to be translated. It was nonetheless clear that Quine’s thesis was rather far from Kuhn’s thesis, indeed that they are incompatible. First, Kuhn thought that incommensurability was a matter of there being no fully adequate translation whereas Quine’s thesis involved the availability of multiple translations. Secondly, Kuhn does believe that the translated expressions do have a meaning, whereas Quine denies this. Thirdly, Kuhn later went on to say that unlike Quine he does not think that reference is inscrutable—it is just very difficult to recover (1976, 191)

>