---
Tags: []
---
Related: [[Monads]] [[Ontology Dyad]] [[Ontology Triad]] [[Ontology Tetrad]]
# Ontology Monad

 > _Polycategorical_ ontologies are concerned with the categories of being. Each polycategorical ontology posits a number of categories. These categories are exclusive and exhaustive: every existing entity belongs to exactly one category.[[74]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ontology#cite_note-Schaffer-75) A recent example of a polycategorical ontology is [E.J. Lowe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E.J._Lowe "E.J. Lowe")'s four-category-ontology.[[77]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ontology#cite_note-Lowe-78) The four categories are object, kind, mode and attribute. The fourfold structure is based on two distinctions. The first distinction is between substantial entities (objects and kinds) and non-substantial entities (modes and attributes). The second distinction is between particular entities (objects and modes) and universal entities (kinds and attributes). Reality is built up through the interplay of entities belonging to different categories: particular entities instantiate universal entities, and non-substantial entities characterize substantial entities

#### Husserl
> Edmund Husserl sees ontology as a _science of essences_. _Sciences of essences_ are contrasted with _factual sciences_: the former are knowable a priori and provide the foundation for the later, which are knowable a posteriori. Ontology as a science of essences is not interested in _actual facts_, but in the essences themselves, whether they _have instances or not_. Husserl distinguishes between _formal ontology_, which investigates the essence of _objectivity in general_, and _regional ontologies_, which study _regional essences_ that are shared by all entities belonging to the region. Regions correspond to the highest genera of concrete entities: material nature, personal consciousness and interpersonal spirit. Husserl's method for studying ontology and sciences of essence in general is called eidetic variation. It involves imagining an object of the kind under investigation and varying its features. The changed feature is _inessential_ to this kind if the object can survive its change, otherwise it belongs to the _kind's essence_. For example, a triangle remains a triangle if one of its sides is extended but it ceases to be a triangle if a fourth side is added. Regional ontology involves applying this method to the essences corresponding to the highest genera


#### Hartmann

Nicolai Hartmann is a 20th-century philosopher within the continental tradition of philosophy. He interprets ontology as Aristotle's science of being qua being: the science of the most general characteristics of entities, usually referred to as categories, and the relations between them. According to Hartmann, the most general categories are _moments of being_ (existence and essence), _modes of being_ (reality and ideality) and _modalities of being_ (possibility, actuality and necessity). Every entity has both _existence_ and _essence_, _Reality_ and _ideality_, by contrast, are two disjunctive categories: every entity is either real or ideal. Ideal entities are universal, returnable and always existing while real entities are individual, unique and destructible. Among the ideal entities are mathematical objects and values. The _modalities of being_ are divided into the absolute modalities (actuality and non-actuality) and the relative modalities (possibility, impossibility and necessity). The relative modalities are _relative_ in the sense that they depend on the absolute modalities: something is possible, impossible or necessary because something else is actual. Hartmann asserts that reality is made up of four levels (_inanimate_, _biological_, _psychological_ and _spiritual_) that form a hierarchy.