# Governance Iterations

Thanks for dialing in to this signal - to briefly introduce myself I'm Josh the relativly new governance coordinator at the Regen foundation. At this point I'm nearly into my second month so I thought it was about time to shine a light into the cavern of uncertainty and update folks on our 'the current state of affairs'.

Ok, so jumping into the purpose of this post - governance... it's quite a abstract term right? due to the potentially unbounded scope and a plurality of potential perspectives, appropriatly framing it is something I struggle with at least. As the subject touches pretty much everything it is essentially whatever **we** think it represents. But who is "we"? 

I don't have an answer to this question yet - so perhaps let me tell you a just a little about my journey within these lands and provide the internal context that's colouring my perceptions of what I think is coming into being? 

I essentially started here in a void of copresence; I had minimal signals coming in and wrote some outlines of my personal views. I was given some space and a soapbox to begin speaking with colleges from which, as a stranger in a strange land dislocated from network customs rituals and traditions, I found uncomfortable. The first internal session on 'frame' was quite touching and inspired confidence and trust in my peers at the foundation. The second session I accidently fell through the floor, but picking myself up again during the third session signs of future stability started to present themselves, even if my sessions were feeling a little rigid and clunky. It seemed that we found an appropriate method to capture and prioritise conversations that matter.

Between the second and third session we started to venture into the wild and the first community call was planted. Mindful of our need for inputs we used a three horizons excersise to elucidate inputs; this extreamly broad framefelt appropriate to the context as participant backgrounds and agendas were largely unknown at the time and possibly in flux. Signals emerged from this and we adapted. A number of people wanted a way to better interface with our team and so we changed the call structure to a more "campfire" format. Team members from the science team and enDAOment we're invited to hold their own space for closer more intimate conversations with the community members who showed up. 

Signalls of unmet needs were still present and we're moving to address them. In particualr the conversation of "what is governance" began to surface during the enDAOment session. This was implicitly directed to myself, but aware of the forums context and the remaining session time I ended up freezing before closing pandoras box with a very short and abstract answer. This was not an attempt to dodge the question; just an inappropriate moment to begin expressing my own views - the response should have been "what do you need it to be?" but the forum didn't feel right for that response either. 

The question opened a door thoug and despite my highly opinionated perspective I'm pretty reluctant to prefigure the community space with such an answer. For me it brings up considerations around legitimacy and when comparing myself to our Regen stakeholders what does a degenerate like me from the technology space have to offer? (a million mangroves anyone?). Thats not to say I've not inhabited or set up "we" spaces before, just that my awe of whats alive reminds me to tread lightly as this is sacred ground and I wish to remain in service of whats authentically coming into being from ecosystem participants. 

The prompt hovewer leads us to the next steps of the community call as it seems the question of governance is very much alive across Regens various nooks and crannies. In that regard I'm proposing that we get ready to stoke another the campfire for this large and expansive discussion. If it interests you please feel invited to join us for the next community call Feb 23rd - we're not making any decisions together yet but your signals will be considered and reflected upon by the team should you wish to share them. Of course you'll still be able to talk to enDAOment and the Science team you prefer face time with them but we'll also begin to address these matters of concern in open forum. 

Grab your marshmallows!