---
Tags: []
---
Related: 
# Microsolidarity Celebration and Mourning

About two years ago I responded to a Microsolidarity loomio thread where a call to gather was made. A number of participants shimmered for me but ulitmatly the continuity was pretty poor. By the third call the group had dissipated. 

I then answered the Humms offering of a Microsolidarity practice week to learn more about the framework. All in all it was a well facillitated week of sessions sharing a number of useful patterns but nothing particularly special other than the hosts; I was already familliar with many of the practices but there was a good crowd. Among them were some people that had turned up to the unpaid gathering. 

Aftert this a few calls to cogregate were put out on loomio but coordination was loose. Among them however was one small group with some faces I'd noted from before. I had little interest in 'holding' the group as I was already experimenting with such in other spaces and for the largest part no one was ever holding me! That was one of the refreshing things about this group - somebody was actually taking responsibility!

When I joined there was already a culture establishing itself; the metaphor of a generative process embodied in an excercise where we unfolded a japaneese tea house. This highlighted the importance of sequence; when things were out of order possibilities were greatly reduced. These distortions acumulate and easily become painfully restrictive, much like burocracy. This was one of the points of the more official microsolidarity doctrine; just stay small and trust eachother rather than codify.

During the first cycle a pattern established itself; Ronen's active energy drove us forward with Toni in the passenger seat next to him while I and Alex passivly rode in the back seat and contributed where there was space. I had pretty much no issue with this setup as it seemed Ronen was a skilled sailor, but later I learn that others had frustrations with the status quo. This was actually quite suprising as I'm usually the rebel; though I did see what I percieved as minor aggitations. These disruptions were managed diplomatically and felt like no biggie te me; I was often greatful for this as they felt tangental to the groups work semantics and whatnot.

During the second cycle I believe we started to ask why we were together and what we were doing. A few agendas were offered up but nothing particularly concrete and generally informed by our various backgrounds. Looking back on this momen I'm suprised at how easily we navigated it - often when it comes to this possibility management things get political reeeeal quick. Alas no, we were pretty chill. My self and Alex resonated on his record label idea, and we were all pretty good with the facillitation / consultancy route. I don't recall Ronen or myself actually throwing our hats in the ring. There was a nice atmosphere around at this time and if memory serves (which it rarely does) we made plans to meet on a greek island at somestage - however we made pretty minimal progress on why we were gathering and what to do (other than starting a culture of some form).

Recalling the third cycle, Ronen began to offer up work to the collective. This was demonstrative action in my opinion; quality work that showed what appropriatly sequenced and coherent material looked like. It was unfinished with plenty space to contribute given its modular design. Strong foundations articulating a way of creating wholesome experiences and interactions. I did not desire to contribute to this work for several reasons but primarily because it was whole and additions I was likely to make would distort the structure. Loading the various cards into working memory before contribution was beyond my capacity. 

As the fourth cycle began, Ronen had met some people in a starter cultures space who appreciated his work and so convened a meeting to see if we were ready to start onboarding others into the group; we we're generally under prepared and at this point started to go downhill in my opinion. Toni and Jennifer were keen to contribute to Ronens foundation but tensions arose due to his refusal of their submissions. His reasoning was that the additions closed possibilities rather than opened them and so distorted the structures. This resonated with my perspective; in honestly I felt like I could probably have made more coherent additions but chose not to for these reasons. Still I appreciated the attempts; we only learn by doing and by doing so repetitivly. Iteration is king.

This cycle was also where things kinda got more political due to lack of trust. Some of the material was on the ever sensitive subject of money/value and ideologies relating to the semantics of this topic started to become contentious. This slowed thigs down and generally made it unpleasent. In my personal opinion this was about trust. I'd done my part to destabilise that in some loomio responses at the collective level and so these issues pointed at me would have been fair enough, but from my perspective Ronen seemed to become the scape goat and proxy for this and I'm still unclear why given his frugal life away from the trappings of society! 

Generally the politics were heating up. Ronens proactivity seemed to be aggitating others and which bound us into a catch 22; without his leadership we were essentially lacking directionality and due to the political climate it seems that nobody has been interested to step up in his absence. Who wants to take the podium only to get shot at? Or worse, not have anyone show up for them - the pain! Make a sacrifical offer? Nah conserve the enregy it's scarce ... Ahh, how've fallen from the pinnicle to the pit: from gleefully squirming on the gorund together, crawling, some promising first steps and then eating the floor! Guess this time we'll need to pick ourselves up alone, and we have been - while crossing the chasm these last few months we've grown!

Whoever "we" are, we are only two years young. In a years time "we" may be running together - but probably not very well! So yeah at this inflection point I invite you to mourn what we've left behind but celebrate the hell out of the growth we've made alone and under our own efforts! I'm sure we've all faced demons and dragons but I think we made it over the chasm; now onwards! (one baby step at a time)

A sacrificial offering with love,
j